HUMANITARIAN

2019

RESPONSE PLAN

JANUARY-DECEMBER 2019

DEC 2018

 
SOUTH

SUDAN



PEOPLE IN NEED

7.1M

PEOPLE TARGETED

5.7M

REQUIREMENTS (US$)

1.5B

NUMBER OF HUMANITARIAN PARTNERS

183
(11 UN, 67 INGOs, 105 LNGOs)

!!!!!
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
!!!!!!
!!!!
!
!!!!!!!!!
!!!!!!! 
95,1812,571!.
!.
!.
!^
!.
!.
!.
!.
!.
!.
MalakalBentiuBorRumbekYambioToritKuajokAweilWauJUBA!
!!
DEMOCRATICREPUBLIC OFTHE CONGOCENTRALAFRICANREPUBLICSUDANETHIOPIAKENYAUGANDAEastern EquatoriaCentralEquatoriaLakesUnityUpper NileJongleiWesternEquatoriaWestern Bahrel GhazalNorthern Bahrel GhazalAbyei region 
364,357 
435,924 
382,906 
114,43241,671 
9,25467,344 
50,114 422,240 
157,475 
160,124 
142,475162,669 
764,400 
785,1049,33015,4712,933144,150129,253WarrapSouth Sudan displacement 
Source: OCHA and partners, Oct 2018Refugees in South SudanxxSouth Sudanese refugees 
in neighbouring countriesxxEstimated number of IDPs xx
Source: OCHA and partners, Oct 2018

This document is produced by the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) on behalf of 
the South Sudan Humanitarian Country Team and partners.

This document provides the Humanitarian Country Team’s shared understanding of the crisis, including the most pressing 
humanitarian need and the estimated number of people who need assistance. It represents a consolidated evidence base and 
helps inform joint strategic response planning. 

The boundaries and names shown and the designations used on the South Sudan maps do not imply official endorsement or 
acceptance by the United Nations. Final boundary between the Republic of South Sudan and the Republic of Sudan has not yet 
been determined. Final status of Abyei region is not yet determined.

Cover photo: WFP/Gabriela Vivacqua



TABLE OF CONTENTS

PART I: COUNTRY STRATEGY

Foreword by the Humanitarian Coordinator .................... 2
The Humanitarian Response Plan at a Glance ................. 3
Overview of the Crisis .......................................................... 4
Strategic Objectives ............................................................. 6
Response Strategy ................................................................ 7
Operational Capacity ......................................................... 15
Humanitarian Access .......................................................... 16
Response Monitoring ......................................................... 17
Summary of Needs, Targets and Requirements ............. 18
PART II: OPERATIONAL RESPONSE PLANS
Camp Coordination and Camp Management ................ 20
Education ............................................................................. 21 
Emergency Shelter and Non-Food Items ........................ 22
Food Security and Livelihoods ......................................... 23 
Health ................................................................................... 24 
Nutrition ............................................................................... 25 
Protection ............................................................................ 26 
Water, Sanitation and Hygiene ......................................... 27
Coordination and Common Services ............................... 28
Logistics ............................................................................... 29 
Refugee Response Plan ..................................................... 30
Abyei Response Plan .............................................................. 31 
PART III: ANNEX
Strategic Objectives, Indicators and Targets .................. 33
Participating Organizations and Funding Requirements 34
End Notes ............................................................................ 37
Guide to Giving

FOREWORD BY

THE HUMANITARIAN 
COORDINATOR

The women, men and children of South Sudan are ready for 
peace. That is the message I heard repeatedly when I travelled 
across the country in 2018. This call intensified with the 
recent signing of the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution 
of the Conflict in South Sudan. There is now great expectation 
that the agreement will pave a way towards a peaceful and 
prosperous country. 

As we prepare to enter 2019, South Sudan remains in a serious 
humanitarian crisis due to the cumulative effects of years of 
conflict and violence against civilians, which have destroyed 
people’s livelihoods and forced 4.2 million people to flee their 
homes – nearly 2 million inside and nearly 2.2 million outside 
the country. The number of people who require humanitarian 
or protection assistance in 2019 remains high at seven million 
– the same as in 2018. Women and children continue to be 
the most affected. Some 2.2 million children are out of school 
and nearly 600,000 pregnant and lactating women will be 
acutely malnourished in 2019. During the first three months 
of the year, every other person is projected to be severely food 
insecure.

The coming year may begin to generate greater confidence 
among displaced people to return home. The scale and 
flow of such movements remain difficult to project. The 
Humanitarian Country Team is assessing likely scenarios and 
will be ready to provide the required support. 

The 2019 Humanitarian Response Plan is well prioritized to 
make the best use of available resources to reach the people 
identified in the Humanitarian Needs Overview as most in 
need. We have refined our targeting and built on lessons 
learned from previous years to further increase efficiencies 
wherever possible. The Humanitarian Country Team will 
prioritize integrated response efforts that tackle people’s 
needs in priority areas holistically. This aims to keep affected 
communities at the centre of the response while maximizing 
synergies among humanitarian clusters for a more effective 
response. We plan to reduce reliance on air operations and 
increase the use of new tools like biometric registrations 
to carefully target assistance. As a result, the 2019 HRP is 
reduced in scope when compared to 2018, targeting 5.7 
million people with an overall appeal of US$1.5 billion. 

The year 2019 will offer more opportunities for development 
actors to address underlying causes of need. There is a 
growing commitment by all partners to provide humanitarian 
assistance while also reducing vulnerabilities and building 
people’s ability to cope. We will continue to work with all 
partners in the coming year to ensure that resilience and 
recovery programmes contribute to reducing the number of 
people in need of emergency relief.

The effective implementation of the plan will require a 
peaceful environment where humanitarian actors have 
consistent and unimpeded access and are not targeted 
by violence. I call on all the signatory parties to the peace 
agreement to stay the course to ensure its successful 
implementation. Committed local non-governmental 
organizations remain a central pillar of our response. Support 
from our donor partners, whose generosity in previous years 
is highly appreciated, will continue to be crucial in 2019.

The Humanitarian Response Plan is worth investing in. The 
humanitarian community in South Sudan has continued to 
innovate and improve its effectiveness. In 2018, we reached 
around 5 million people despite the challenges we faced. With 
the new year, we can achieve even more. And the people of 
South Sudan, full of hope and aspirations, deserve nothing 
less.

Alain Noudéhou
Humanitarian Coordinator



THE HUMANITARIAN RESPONSE PLAN

AT A GLANCE

NUMBER OF PARTNERS

PEOPLE IN NEED

7.1M

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 1

 Save lives by providing timely 
and integrated multi-sector 
assistance and services to 
reduce acute needs among 
the most vulnerable women, 
men, girls and boys

6711105183partnersLNGOs(57%)
INGOs(37%)
UN(6%)
Number of humanitarian partners
PEOPLE TARGETED

5.7M

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 2

 Protect vulnerable women, 
men, girls and boys through 
provision of specialized and 
integrated services

REQUIREMENTS (US$)

1.5B

NUMBER OF PROJECTS

 396

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 3

 Support at-risk communities 
to promote and sustain their 
resilience to acute shocks and 
chronic stresses

LakesCentralEquatoriaEastern EquatoriaUpper NileWesternBahr elGhazalUnityAbyeiNorthernBahr el GhazalJongleiWarrapWesternEquatoriaPeople in need by State
1.2M0.6M0.9M0.8M0.6M0.4M0.3M0.8M0.6M0.9MWestern Bahr el Ghazal419295Western Equatoria355676Grand Total7249766
PEOPLE IN NEED

7.1M

RESPONSE ENABLERS 

Put affectedcommunitiesat the centre1Support increased 
involvementof local responders2Enable effectiveresponse and advocacythrough protection3Use evidencefor efficient useof resources4Intergrateservicesacross sectorsLeveragepotentialfor cash6Promote enablingoperationalenvironment57
PEOPLE TARGETED

5.7M

FUNDING REQUIREMENTS PER SECTOR (US$)

 FSL Nutrition WASH Health Protection Logs Education ES&NFI CCCM CCS 
680M187M139M135M121M87M64M55M 21M17M
17M19M30M54M87M100M120M130M180M7M30M9M10M21M25M650M
Cluster 
requirementsRefugee 
requirementsTotal sector 
requirements
$121M$1.4B$1.5BCluster requirementsRefugee requirementsTotal requirements15M2M
LakesCentralEquatoriaEastern EquatoriaUpper NileWesternBahr elGhazalUnityAbyeiNorthernBahr el GhazalJongleiWarrapWesternEquatoriaPeople targeted by State
1.1M0.4M0.8M0.7M0.4M0.2M0.3M0.7M0.4M0.8M

OVERVIEW OF

THE CRISIS

The recently revitalized peace process promises to offer new opportunities in 
2019 for South Sudan’s women, men and children.1 However, the cumulative 
effects of years of conflict, violence and destroyed livelihoods have left more 
than 7 million people or about two thirds of the population in dire need of some 
form of humanitarian assistance and protection in 2019 – the same proportion as 
in 2018. While the situation is no longer escalating at a rapid speed, the country 
remains in the grip of a serious humanitarian crisis. 

 

A legacy of conflict, violence and abuse

Five years of the most recent conflict has forced almost 4.2 
million people to flee their homes in search of safety, nearly 
2 million of them within and nearly 2.2 million outside the 
country.2 While the intensity of conflict may have reduced 
recently, and clashes have been contained to certain regions, 
vulnerable people will continue to experience the impacts of 
the conflict through 2019. United Nations reports indicate 
that all parties to the conflict have repeatedly violated 
international humanitarian law and perpetrated serious 
human rights abuses, including gang rape, abductions, sexual 
slavery of women and girls, and recruitment of children, both 
girls and boys.3 People affected by the conflict, including the 
300,000 refugees in South Sudan, repeatedly identify security 
among their primary needs.

Insufficient basic services

The conflict and associated economic decline have eroded 
the Government’s ability to provide consistent basic services 
to its people. Currently, one primary health centre serves 

TIMELINE OF CRISIS KEY EVENTS

01M2M3M4M5M01M2M3M4M5M
15 December 2013Fighting erupts in Juba and 
quickly spreads to Jonglei, 
Unity and Upper Nile. 
Thousands of people flee their 
homes.
October 2014Bentiu townattacked.
February 2014Fighting breaks out in 
Leer Town, Unity, 
and Malakal town, 
Upper Nile.
May 2014August 2014Aid workers 
killed in 
Maban 
County, 
Upper Nile.
Agreement on the 
Resolution of the Conflict in 
the Republic of South 
Sudan signed by parties to 
the conflict.
January 2015March 2015 2017August 2015Fighting 
intensifies 
around Renk 
and Kaka.
Parties to the conflict sign 
the Recommitment on 
Humanitarian Matters of 
the Cessation of Hostilities 
Agreement. 
October 2015
Fighting in the 
Greater Upper 
Nile region 
intensifies.
May 2015Aid workers are forced 
to relocate from Leer, 
Ganyiel, Nyal, 
Mayendit, Koch, Melut 
and Kodok due to 
fighting and insecurity.
Fighting resumes in Unity. 
Humanitarian partners suspend 
operations and withdraw staff 
from Leer. Fighting in Western 
Equatoria leaves thousands 
displaced and threatens key 
humanitarian supply routes.
April 2016
Formation of the 
Transitional 
Government of 
National Unity of 
the Republic of 
South Sudan.
February 2016Fighting breaks out in 
Malakal PoC, Pibor, Wau, 
Yambio and Mundri West 
causing destruction and 
displacement.
76,700115,0002.2 from South Sudan to neighbouring countriesInternally displaced people22 January 2014
Cessation of Hostilities 
agreement signed by 
parties to the conflict.
internally displaced people prior to 15 Dec 2013South Sudanese refugees 
before 15 Dec 2013

an average of 50,000 people.4 Only 40 per cent of nutrition 
treatment centres have access to safe water,5 a gap that puts 
more vulnerable people, particularly women, boys and girls, 
at risk of malnutrition and disease. Only about one in five 
childbirths involves a skilled health care worker6 and the 
maternal mortality ratio is estimated at 789 per 100,000 live 
births.7 Every third school has been damaged, destroyed, 
occupied or closed since 2013,8 and more than 70 per cent of 
children who should be attending classes are not receiving an 
education.9 

Destroyed livelihoods and eroded coping capacity

Years of conflict, displacement and underdevelopment have 
limited people’s livelihood opportunities, marginalized 
women’s formal employment opportunities, and weakened 
families’ ability to cope with the protracted crisis and 
sudden shocks, like the death of a wage earner or loss of 
cattle.10 The livelihoods of 80 per cent of people are based 
on agricultural and pastoralist activities.11 Farmers, who 
are mostly women,12 and their families have been displaced 
from their fertile lands. Annual cereal production has 
reduced by 25 per cent from 2014 to 2017, leaving nearly 
500,000 metric tons deficit for 2018.13 Over 80 per cent of 
the population lives below the absolute poverty line14 and 
half the population will be severely food insecure between 
January and March 2019,15 similar to the same period in 
2018. The number of people in Integrated Food Security 
Phase Classification (IPC) Phase 5 is expected to nearly 
double from the same period in 2018.16

Limited access to assistance and protection

About 1.5 million people live in areas facing high levels of 
access constraints – places where armed hostilities, violence 
against aid workers and assets, and other access impediments 
render humanitarian activities severely restricted, or in some 
cases impossible.17 In 2018, violence against humanitarian 
personnel and assets consistently accounted for over half 
of all reported incidents. More than 500 aid workers were 
relocated due to insecurity, disrupting the provision of life-
saving assistance and protection services to people in need for 
prolonged periods. Communities’ inability to access lifesaving 
support risks pushing women, men and children deeper into 
crisis. Many of the hardest to reach areas in Unity, Upper 
Nile and Western Bahr el Ghazal have alarming rates of food 
insecurity, malnutrition, and sexual and gender-based violence.

For a comprehensive analysis 
of humanitarian needs in 
South Sudan, see the 2019 
South Sudan Humanitarian 
Needs Overview: 

https://bit.ly/2TTKoPQ

SouthSudanNov 2018NEEDShumanitarianoverview2019PeoPle iN Need7.1m

STRATEGIC

OBJECTIVES

In 2019, humanitarian partners will aim to deliver life-saving assistance and 
protection to address the most acute needs of 5.7 million people, out of an 
estimated 7.1 million people in need. The response will be guided by assessed 
needs, identified in the Humanitarian Needs Overview, and three Strategic 
Objectives, agreed by the Humanitarian Country Team. All activities will promote 
the safety, dignity and equitable access to principled and timely humanitarian 
assistance and protection to affected women, men, girls, boys, older persons and 
people with disabilities.

3 Support at-risk 
communities to promote 
and sustain their 
resilience to acute shocks 
and chronic stresses. 
Acknowledging that years of conflict 
have eroded public services and people’s 
resilience, humanitarian partners will 
complement services provided by 
authorities and development partners 
to support people’s resilience and tackle 
underlying causes of vulnerability. This 
will be done through linkages with the 
United Nations Cooperation Framework 
and the progressive operationalization 
of the New Way of Working.18 The 
coordinated response will support at-risk 
communities’ ability to cope with acute 
shocks, like violent clashes and disease 
outbreaks, as well as chronic conditions, 
from deep-seated poverty to gender 
inequality. 

1 Save lives by providing 
timely and integrated 
multi-sector assistance 
and services to reduce 
acute needs among the 
most vulnerable women, men, 
girls and boys. 
The humanitarian imperative to 
save lives, alleviate suffering and 
uphold dignity in areas of most 
severe need will continue to drive 
the humanitarian response in 2019. 
Humanitarian partners across sectors 
will strengthen the integration of their 
services to yield maximum positive 
outcomes for people in need. To 
improve communities’ safe and timely 
access to conflict-sensitive assistance, 
aid organizations will employ a 
combination of static and mobile, 
as well as cash and in-kind response 
modalities. 

2Protect vulnerable 
women, men, girls and 
boys through provision 
of specialized and 
integrated services.
Protection of civilians will remain 
central to the humanitarian response, 
in line with people’s needs and the 
HCT’s recently revised Protection 
Strategy. Through specialized 
and joint, integrated services, all 
humanitarian actors will advocate 
for and respond to the protection 
needs of conflict-affected people 
with due regard to international 
norms and standards, and reduce 
the protection risks faced by most 
vulnerable groups, including women 
at risk. The humanitarian community 
will contribute to the System-Wide 
Approach to the Protection of 
Civilians alongside the United Nations 
Mission in South Sudan and other 
relevant partners. 



RESPONSE

STRATEGY

2019 planning assumptions

Overall context

As outlined in the Humanitarian Response Plan (HNO), 
South Sudan is expected to remain in the grip of a serious 
humanitarian crisis in 2019 due to the cumulative effects of 
years of conflict, violence and destroyed livelihoods. This 
has left the people of South Sudan in a highly vulnerable 
state, with women and children most affected. While the 
implementation of the revitalized peace agreement is 
expected to offer new opportunities to improve aid provision 
and reduce vulnerability, impacts will vary by location and 
population group,19 and take time to materialize, particularly 
for improvements in the economic situation, availability 
of Government-provided basic services, and a reduction 
of pressures placed on communities hosting displaced 
populations and people seeking durable solutions. 

Food insecurity 

Extreme levels of food insecurity and high rates of malnutrition 
are expected to persist in many areas affected by protracted 
conflict and impediments to humanitarian access, which are 
abundant across many of the areas with highest food security 
levels. Half the population will be severely food insecure 
between January and March 2019,20 similar to the same period 
in 2018, while the number of people in IPC Phase 5 is expected 
to nearly double from the same period in 2018.21 

Displacement, returns and other durable solutions

The response plan assumes that in the short term, 
displacement will remain both a driver and a result of 
vulnerability. The United Nations Country Team is actively 
exploring likely scenarios for refugees’ and internally 
displaced people’s (IDP) response to the revitalized peace 
process and the accelerated momentum gained through the 
October 2018 national peace celebrations. Between November 
2017 and October 2018, some 126,000 refugees were reported 
to have returned to South Sudan, of which nearly 16,000 
had been verified.22 The majority returned from Uganda and 
Ethiopia. Further household-level analysis will be conducted 
through early 2019 in countries of asylum to gauge the nearly 
2.2 million refugees’ intentions to return from the region 
to South Sudan – including potential timeframe, volume 
and destinations for return – and the nearly 2 million IDPs’ 
intentions regarding returns or relocations from their current 

IPC CLASSIFICATION FOR JANUARY – MARCH 2019 

Western Bahrel GhazalUnityLakesWestern EquatoriaCentralEquatoriaEastesrn EquatoriaJongleiUpper NileAbyeiNorthern Bahrel Ghazal
iPC PhaseCatastropheemergencyCrisis
Stressedminimalno data
Source: IPC TWG, Sept 2018 



places of displacement, or integration in new communities, 
particularly in urban settings. 

Initially, people who have been displaced may return 
temporarily or seasonally to farm; to evaluate their options 
regarding housing, land and property and access to 
livelihoods, services and support available; and to assess their 
confidence in safety and security. Some of the early returns 
may not be sustainable due to insecurity and unmet assistance 
and protection needs, particularly related to housing, land 
and property. Some 87 per cent of the verified refugee 
returnees were unable to access their places of origin, with 
their houses either destroyed or occupied.23 In a recent study 
on IDPs, displaced people cited general improvement of the 
security situation in areas of return – particularly against 
gender-based violence for women – and assurances from 
Government on safety, as the most prominent pre-conditions 
for return, followed by access to work, school, and critical 
infrastructure in areas of return.24 Displaced persons seeking 
solutions are likely to continue to have immediate, temporary 
humanitarian needs, such as shelter and food, that will 
need to be addressed to support the longer-term process of 
achieving durable solutions.

Disease

Epidemic-prone diseases, such as measles, meningitis and 
hepatitis E, are expected to persist and possibly spread into new 
areas. South Sudan is classified by the World Health Organization 
as at “very high risk” for Ebola Virus Disease (EVD), given 
the outbreak in the neighbouring Democratic Republic of the 
Congo (DRC). The Government and aid organizations have 
actively increased preparedness measures, focusing on the South 
Sudanese states bordering the DRC and Uganda. While EVD 
is not included in the HRP, the HCT is ready to adjust the plan 
beyond preparedness measures, as needed. 

Humanitarian access 

The signing of the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution 
of the Conflict in South Sudan (R-ARCSS) can be expected to 
positively affect humanitarian access, if it leads to a cessation 
of hostilities and if the parties’ commitments related to 
humanitarian assistance and reconstruction are adhered to. 
While there is considerable hope that commitments will be 
honoured, the operational environment is unlikely to improve 
significantly in the immediate period. Humanitarian actors 
will likely continue to face obstacles to securing consistent 
and principled access to all people in need, and vice versa, at 
least in the short term.

Response scope

The Humanitarian Response Plan (HRP) targets 80 per cent 
of the most vulnerable women, men, boys and girls in need. 
To make the best use of limited humanitarian resources 
and to ensure the people identified as most in need can be 
reached, the response boundaries have been drawn to focus 
on lifesaving assistance and protection services and selected 
activities that promote people’s coping capacities. Response 
to lower level needs such as minimal and stressed food 
insecurity (IPC Phase 1 and 2) has been excluded. Of the total 
396 projects in the HRP, 379 relate to Strategic Objective 1, 
lifesaving assistance. The response scope and the reduction 
of some 300,000 people in the overall population targeted 
compared to 2018 – even with the sustained high needs 
– is also informed by the work done by the Government, 
development actors, and ongoing operational coordination 
and collaboration with humanitarian partners outside the 
HRP, such as the Red Cross Movement and Médecins Sans 
Frontières, as described in more detail below.

In line with the integrated and gender-sensitive needs analysis 
presented in the 2019 HNO, humanitarian partners aim to 
support IDPs, host communities, people seeking durable 
solutions and individuals who are most vulnerable to sudden 
shocks and chronic stresses. Temporally, key seasonal events 
presented in the calendar below will guide the emphasis of the 
response, including the impact of the rainy season on disease 
outbreaks and the lean and harvest seasons on food security. 
Geographically, the response covers every county in South 
Sudan, access conditions and operational footprint permitting. 

Response priorities

Based on the analysis of people’s intersectoral needs in the 
HNO, the key response priorities for 2019 are: a collective 
response to food insecurity in areas of most severe need; 
linking the response to durable solutions where people can 
achieve some stability; and the centrality of gender-sensitive 
protection in all programming, which includes actions 
on prevention of sexual exploitation and abuse, gender-
based violence and accountability to affected people. The 

CALENDAR OF KEY SEASONAL EVENTS 

Harvest 
periodPlanting 
seasonGrowingseason 
Diarrhoeal diseases: acute watery diarrhoea, dysentery, cholera and typhoid feverMalariaDry 
seasonRainyseason 
Pre-position 
suppliesEpidemic meningitisSeasonalfloodsHunger gap period/
lean seasonEarly start of the 
lean seasonDry 
season
FloodsrecedeHarvest 
periodJanFebMarAprMayJunJulAugSepOctNovDec

Inter-Cluster Working Group (ICWG) will regularly follow 
up with clusters on the implementation of these priority 
criteria in operational planning and update the HCT on any 
corrective action required. The HCT will undertake its next 
prioritization exercise in early 2019 to review the evolving 
context and assess the impact of the growing emphasis on 
integrated response. In addition to the collective priorities, 
each cluster has ranked the criticality of their 2019 activities 
based on the severity of need, according to four scenarios of 
funding availability. The results of this exercise are presented 
on page 13 and 14. 

The HCT will advocate with existing and potential donors 
to enable the selected response priorities receive adequate 
funding. In addition, the South Sudan Humanitarian Fund’s 
Advisory Board uses allocation-specific prioritization criteria 
to address most severe needs in selected locations. 

Engagement with Government

Humanitarian partners engage with the Government 
at the strategic level through the Humanitarian High-
Level Oversight Committee, chaired by the Minister of 
Cabinet Affairs, and primarily through the Humanitarian 
Coordination Forum, co-chaired by the Minister for 
Humanitarian Affairs and the Humanitarian Coordinator. At 
the operational level, humanitarians work with the Ministry 
of Humanitarian Affairs and Disaster Management, the 
Relief and Rehabilitation Commission, the Commission 
for Refugee Affairs, relevant line ministries and local 
authorities. The Ministry of Humanitarian Affairs and 
Disaster Management has a Strategic Plan for 2018-2020 and 
the Government launched in 2018 a National Framework for 
Return, Reintegration and Relocation of Displaced Persons. 
The Ministry is also working on enactment of a national 
legislation on internal displacement covering all phases of 
displacement, with technical support of the HCT.

While these frameworks and partnerships offer opportunities 
for increased Government ownership of humanitarian and 
development programming and service provision over time, 
the Government’s capacity remains limited due to fiscal and 
other constraints. For example, NGOs currently provide 
approximately 80 per cent of all healthcare services in the 
country and in recent years, Overseas Development Assistance 
has more than doubled the Government’s spending.25

Synergies with development to support crisis-
affected people

The 2019 HRP coincides with the launch of the United Nations 
Cooperation Framework with South Sudan for 2019-2021 
(UNCF). The UNCF outlines multi-year outcomes across four 
thematic areas,26 reflecting the National Development Strategy 
and the Sustainable Development Goals. During 2019, the 
United Nations Country Team (UNCT) and the HCT will 
undertake joint analysis and review the interventions and 
results outlined in the two frameworks to strengthen synergies 
for the effective delivery of aid and support to crisis-affected 
people and communities. 

Given the protracted crisis in South Sudan, several sectors are 
already coordinated across development and humanitarian 
programming. For example, minimum WASH interventions 
in institutions, such as health facilities and schools, are 
mapped and complement development projects for urban 
water; interventions and funding provided for Education 
in Emergencies is leveraged to complement resources to 
build local capacity provided under the Global Partnership 
for Education; emergency health support complements 
programming supported by the Health Pooled Fund; and 
the Partnership for Recovery and Resilience is pursued in 
more stable locations to further strengthen local governance, 
livelihoods and service delivery systems, and enhance long-
term coping mechanisms of vulnerable populations, including 
those currently receiving humanitarian assistance. 

The New Way of Working, a key outcome of the 2016 World 
Humanitarian Summit, is gradually being operationalized 
in South Sudan. The HCT and UNCT have identified 
addressing food insecurity and gender-based violence (GBV) 
as the collective multi-year outcomes for humanitarian and 
development actors, based on the convergence of these areas 
between the HRP and UNCF. The two teams will refine their 
plans through 2019 for maximum impact on people in need.

Coordination with UN Mission in South Sudan

Protection of civilians is the first pillar of the UNMISS 
mandate.27 The HCT coordinates closely with the Mission, 
including through the strategic UNMISS-Humanitarian Task 
Team and related operational working group, which address 
issues of shared concern, such as humanitarian assistance 
and protection of civilians within and outside the PoC sites 
located on UNMISS bases. UNMISS and humanitarian 
partners are represented in national and local level Solutions 
Working Groups to ensure a coordinated and coherent 
approach to durable solutions for displaced people, in 
accordance with IASC guidance and relevant HCT policies.28 
Recent areas of collaboration include work around the PoC 
sites in Bentiu, Bor, Juba and Wau. Humanitarians also work 
alongside UNMISS within the framework of the System-Wide 
Approach to the Protection of Civilians29 in advancing state 
responsibility to protect the civilian population, fostering 
a positive protection environment, and assisting survivors 
of violations and abuses. Further, UNMISS is mandated to 
create conditions conducive to the delivery of humanitarian 
assistance,30 which can entail the use of force protection 
to support humanitarian activities – as a last resort and in 
line with established international guidelines. Engagement 
in 2019 will focus on reaching affected women, men and 
children with assistance and protection equitably and aligning 
resources to be used where they are needed most.

Static and mobile response to reach people across 
the country

To ensure people’s timely and safe access to assistance 
and protection, the humanitarian response will employ a 
combination of static and mobile response modalities. While 



the overall focus will be on static response, mobile and rapid 
response teams, including the inter-agency Integrated Rapid 
Response Mechanism, will cover new or unmet needs in hard-
to-reach areas and people in areas without field presence. The 
teams operate either from the capital or from sub-offices. The 
work of the mobile teams will be prioritized on a bi-weekly 
basis by relevant clusters in the ICWG, while plans will be 
made in the Operational Working Group to carry it out in a 
coordinated way across the community of partners. 

Prevention of and response to sexual exploitation 
and abuse

Addressing sexual exploitation and abuse is a priority 
for the humanitarian community and an area of shared 
accountability in the most recent HCT Compact. All 2019 
HRP projects considered implementation of PSEA during the 
response. The inter-agency Prevention of Sexual Exploitation 
and Abuse (PSEA) Task Force, which includes UN and NGO 
partners, has a costed four-year PSEA strategy. It focuses on 
SEA risk identification and mitigation; prevention; complaint 
reporting and response; enforcement and compliance; 
and victim assistance. The Task Force’s annual workplan 
prioritizes risk assessments, awareness raising and support 
to community-based complaints mechanisms, currently 
activated in 12 locations across the country. A Seven-Point 
Leadership Action Plan championed by the Humanitarian 
Coordinator augments work of the Task Force by mobilizing 
leadership support to PSEA. 

Response enablers 

1. Put affected communities at the centre of humanitarian 
response

In 2019, humanitarian organizations will increase community 
participation in humanitarian decision making in a way that is 
representative of affected people’s needs and the distinct risks 
related to gender, age and diversity. Through the inter-agency 
Communication and Community Engagement Working 
Group, humanitarians will review existing approaches, such 
as town hall meetings where affected women, men and 
children can ask questions from humanitarian organizations 
and the dialogue is broadcast on the radio. The working 
group will support clusters in mainstreaming best practices 
in community engagement, utilizing bi-weekly community 
feedback reports produced through 2018 as a baseline from 
which to measure progress in 2019. The support will include 
the development of common platforms, coordinated analysis, 
planning and monitoring. Following discussions in the ICWG 
and HCT in 2018 on strengthening community engagement 
to manage tensions with respect to service provision, hiring 
practices, casual labour rates and security issues, the working 
group will in 2019 prioritize providing technical guidance and 
information such as stakeholder mapping, analysis of local 
power structures at community level, gender and age analysis, 
staff training, and support to integration and harmonization 
between organizational approaches.

2. Support increased involvement of local responders 

Based on commitments made at the World Humanitarian 
Summit on localization of aid and recognizing the 
existing capacity and potential of South Sudanese NGOs 
in humanitarian action, efforts will be made to increase 
their involvement across the response. Beyond sub-
granting, international aid organizations will support local 
organizations through trainings, mentorship and regular 
capacity assessment to identify and leverage local partners’ 
comparative advantages, such as their in-depth contextual 
knowledge, including of gender dynamics. South Sudanese 
partners with sufficient staff capacity, policies and operational 
experience will be encouraged to take up leadership roles in 

RESPONSE ENABLERS

Put affectedcommunitiesat the centrePrioritizeresponse andresources1Support increased 
involvementof local responders2Enable effectiveresponse and advocacythrough protection3Use evidencefor efficient useof resources4Intergrateservicesacross sectorsLeveragepotentialfor cash6Promote enablingoperationalenvironment57

humanitarian clusters or their technical working and advisory 
groups. This includes intentional effort to support women-led 
and women-focused organizations. Efforts will also be made 
through the ICWG and HCT to support local responders to 
deal with pressures from authorities that could compromise 
humanitarian principles. Local partners will be supported in 
their resource mobilization. The South Sudan Humanitarian 
Fund has, in line with the Grand Bargain commitments and 
its allocation strategy, increased direct funding to local non-
governmental organizations (LNGOs) from 7 per cent in 2013 
to at least 40 per cent – or more than $20 million – in 2018.

3. Enable effective humanitarian response and advocacy 
through protection 

The protection of affected and at-risk women, men, girls 
and boys will inform all humanitarian decision-making and 
response. Through collective protection and gender risk 
analysis, aid organizations will ensure that humanitarian 
activities do not exacerbate risks or reinforce patterns of 
violations or gender inequality. In line with the HCT Protection 
Strategy and the System-Wide Approach to the Protection of 
Civilians, partners will contribute to protective outcomes by 
providing specialized and integrated programmes. All clusters 
will identify protection champions to promote protection 
mainstreaming, age-gender-diversity and conflict-sensitivity 
in their response. Humanitarians will advocate with all parties 
to the conflict on their responsibilities and obligations under 
international humanitarian and human rights law, including 
normative standards on protection from discrimination. 
Principled engagement will be fostered with local communities 
and authorities, UNMISS, development actors and donors to 
develop a collective approach to protection in South Sudan, 
including durable solutions.

4. Use evidence and innovative approaches to prioritize 
response to needs with efficient use of limited resources 

To maximize the use of limited resources and reach women, 
men and children in need, the response will be informed by 
an evidence-based, regular prioritization of needs. This will be 
strengthened through bi-weekly context analysis exercises led 
by the Needs Analysis Working Group, tasked by the ICWG 
to identify geographic focus areas, hotspots and blind spots, 
categories of people in need disaggregated by age, gender 
and diversity, and resources required to respond effectively to 
differentiated needs. The use of resources will be guided by 
the expressed views of affected communities and information 
from coordinated joint assessments, including the IPC. 
Needs-based targeting of aid will also be improved by using 
innovative tools, such as biometric registration of displaced 
and host communities. This will lead to savings and more 
cost-effective planning and resource allocation by enhancing 
the understanding of humanitarian needs and reducing 
multiple registration of people in need.

5. Promote an enabling operational environment that 
minimizes access constraints

Access constraints in South Sudan encompass a wide range 
of dimensions that include security, physical, seasonal, 
operational and bureaucratic impediments.31 While some of 
these issues can be resolved by humanitarian organizations 
individually, a more collective and strategic approach will 
benefit all. The Access Working Group will continue to 
identify key impediments to service delivery and develop 
appropriate responses and strategies for the HCT. This may 
entail more decentralized modes of operating or an evidence-
based advocacy strategy aimed at interlocutors who can bring 
about the required change – be that relevant authorities, 
community leaders, influential regional actors, or members 
of the Security Council, building on advances in targeted 
advocacy made in 2018. 

6. Integrate services across sectors to contribute to more than 
one outcome in areas of acute vulnerability

In 2019, the HCT will prioritize integrated multi-sectoral 
responses with the aim of delivering more people-
centered assistance, increasing the collective impacts of 
the humanitarian response beyond one sector, and gaining 
efficiencies. Partners will build on lessons learned from 
recent years’ efforts to mitigate the risk of famine, where 
clusters have come together to develop an integrated package 
of mutually reinforcing services across Food Security and 
Livelihoods (FSL), Nutrition, Water, Sanitation and Hygiene 
(WASH), Health and Protection Clusters. The sectoral 
response plans presented in Part II outline each cluster’s 
approach to integration. The ICWG will facilitate integration 
efforts and support multi-sector approaches. 

7. Leverage potential for cash transfer programming 

Cash Transfer Programming (CTP) continues to be an 
expanding response modality in South Sudan and one that is 
welcomed by people affected by the crisis. In a recent survey, 
more than 90 per cent of people stated their preference of 
cash over in-kind food assistance, noting that cash offers them 
greater choice and broader options regarding their lives, and 
is also easier to save and transport during displacement.32 


Cluster

2019 HRP requirements for 
Cash Transfer Programming 
(in US$)

Camp Coordination and Camp 
Management

$82,000

Education

$366,000

Food Security and Livelihoods

$105,074,000

Health

$821,000

Emergency Shelter and NFIs

$7,781,000

Nutrition

$1,385,000

Protection

$1,885,000

Water, Sanitation and Hygiene

$1,654,000

Coordination and Common Services

$345,000

Refugee Response

$3,623,000

Total

$123,000,000







In 2018, nearly 60 partners reached more than 1.6 million 
people with CTP, primarily under the FSL Cluster where 
more than half of cluster partners successfully used cash and 
vouchers, and through the Emergency Shelter and Non-Food 
Items (ES/NFI) Cluster where every fifth partner used cash. 

In 2019, at least 82 humanitarian organizations across all 
clusters apart from Logistics will use CTP, including through 
multi-purpose and conditional cash. The FSL Cluster remains 
the largest CTP actor, targeting approximately 1.4 million 
people in IPC Phase 3, 4 and 5 counties with CTP, followed 
by the ES/NFI Cluster which will target some 180,000 people 
with cash during the year. The refugee response will also use 
CTP. HRP partners are seeking $123 million for CTP, or some 
8 per cent of total 2019 requirements.

The inter-agency Cash Working Group, with backstopping 
from the Cash and Markets Standby Capacity Project, 
will continue to provide technical support to clusters and 
strengthen coordination and coherent approaches among 
existing and emerging CTP actors, with the aim of eventually 
mainstreaming CTP across the humanitarian response 
both geographically and programmatically. To this end, 
the working group will undertake feasibility assessments, 
collect evidence and gender-sensitive analysis of CTP 
modalities used in South Sudan, and share good practices 
from comparable contexts to inform piloting of new tools. 
The group will also prioritize market monitoring, protection 
and gender analysis, research on financial infrastructure and 
financial service providers, CTP information management 
and monitoring through 5Ws, and guidance on targeting and 
community-based participatory planning. This set of actions 
will help further defining an evidence-based CTP response 
modality fit for South Sudan.33

Spotlight on integration: A minimum package of 
interventions for famine risk mitigation

Since the malnutrition and food insecurity crisis in 
Northern Bahr El Ghazal in late 2016, the humanitarian 
community has intensified its efforts to support severely 
food insecure and malnourished people through an 
integrated minimum package of services.34 This minimum 
package of FSL, health, nutrition and WASH support was 
further refined in the prevention of and response to the 
localized famine in Unity in early 2017 and optimized 
during the 2018 humanitarian response, with gradual 
involvement of protection programming and in particular 
response to GBV. It includes collectively agreed support 
at household, community and facility level, ranging from 
malnutrition treatment to emergency food assistance 
and safe protection referrals, and from household water 
treatment to infection prevention and control.

The rationale for the integrated package stems from 
the recognition that people’s malnutrition is driven 
by a convergence of factors–including poor access to 
public health and WASH services, poor access to and 
availability of food due to dysfunctional markets and 
reduced farm production, and poor infant and young 
child feeding practices on food utilization–as well as 
social norms and behaviours that discriminate against 
gender or age. Similarly, infectious diseases can spread in 
food emergencies if people do not have sufficient access 
to health services, emergency nutrition support and 
clean water. Recognizing that malnutrition and severe 
food insecurity has been primarily driven by conflict in 
South Sudan, the highest priority areas for the integrated 
package for famine risk mitigation frequently converge 
with areas of severe protection needs, especially for 
vulnerable categories including children and women 
head of households, older persons and people with 
disabilities.

It is not feasible, nor required, to provide the integrated 
package for famine risk mitigation across the country. 
As exemplified in the HNO, people’s needs converge 
to different extents across geographic areas. The five 
clusters’ (FSL, Nutrition, WASH, Health and Protection) 
footprints also vary across the country. The clusters will 
prioritize the provision of the integrated package based 
on geographical convergence of the following multi-
sector indicators: 

1. Malaria/cholera/measles outbreak

2. Counties with emergency or catastrophic levels of food 
insecurity (IPC Phase 4 and 5)

3. Counties with Global Acute Malnutrition above 15 
per cent (used also as proxy for WASH requirements, 
since WASH services are suboptimal throughout the 
country)

4. Counties with most severe protection needs 

5. Combinations of the above criteria

The implementation of the integrated package in high 
priority locations will be monitored throughout the 
year. For example, partners will monitor the number 
of Outpatient Therapeutic Programmes and Targeted 
Supplementary Feeding Programmes which are 
integrated with FSL programming or with integrated 
WASH services and the number of health facilities that 
have safe water supply. An integrated package will ensure 
management of co-existing illnesses of malnourished 
children and ensure the referral of medically complicated 
children to stabilization centres.



SECTORAL PRIORITIZATION 

For full table, please see: https://bit.ly/2FMbncV

1-25% funding

Top priority activities

26-50% funding

Additional priority activities

51-75% funding

Additional priority activities

76-100% funding

Additional priority activities

··Support site management
··Conduct basic Communication with 
Communities (CwC)
··Conduct basic training
··Monitor, assess and advocate


··Conduct site care and maintenance 
··Support information management


··Support site development, 
community-based CCCM in other 
camp-like settings
··Extend CwC and training


··Extend community-based CCCM in 
other camp-like settings


··Reopen occupied and/or closed 
schools
··Promote basic cognitive 
development and school feeding 
··Build emergency life-saving skills 
··Procure 50% of Education in 
Emergencies pipeline supplies


··Conduct light rehabilitation
··Provide WASH in schools
··Promote cognitive development 
··Support life-saving skills and 
disease preventive messaging 
··Provide school meals
··Procure additional 50% of pipeline


··Conduct basic rehabilitation and 
additional temporary learning 
spaces
··Promote cognitive development 
··Support life-saving skills and 
messaging 
··Provide school meals
··WASH in schools, including disease 
preventive messaging


··Conduct basic rehabilitation and 
additional temporary leaning 
spaces
··Promote cognitive development 
··Life-saving skills and messaging 
··School meals
··WASH in schools, including disease 
preventive messaging
··Youth engagement (coordination 
with other sectors) 


··Provide access to life-saving ES/NFIs 
··Procure pipeline supplies for 
essential ES/NFIs
··Mainstream community 
engagement, GBV, Housing, Land 
and Property (HLP), and conflict 
sensitive approaches 


··Maintain shelters for IDPs inside 
Protection of Civilians sites and 
camp-like settings
··Upgrade shelters
··Replenish essential ES/NFIs
··Mainstream community 
engagement, GBV, HLP and conflict-
sensitive approaches


··Maintain Pipeline system for in-kind 
provision
··Engage the community in a way that 
stimulates active participation
··Upgrade shelters
··Monitor quality service provision
··Mainstream GBV, HLP and conflict 
sensitive approaches 


··Provide cash-based interventions 
for emergency shelter and NFIs
··Provide access to transitional shelter 
and essential non-food items 


··Undertake general food distribution 
or unconditional cash/voucher 
transfers in IPC 4 and 5 areas, with 
blanket supplementary feeding for 
children under 5 (U5)
··Distribute fishing and rapid 
response livelihood kits
··Procure 25% of emergency food 
and livelihoods pipeline


··Implement food and nutrition 
assistance for most at-risk IPC phase 
3 areas
··Provide conditional assistance in 
the form of cash/vouchers or food
··Protect livelihoods through main 
season seeds and tool and dry 
season fish and vegetable kit 
distribution in IPC Phase 4 and 5
··Support market functionality, 
implement emergency livestock 
interventions and distribute 
vegetable main season cereal crop 
kits in IPC 4 and 5
··Procure additional 25% of 
emergency food & livelihoods 
pipeline


··Implement food and nutrition 
assistance to targeted vulnerable 
population in IPC Phase 3
··Protect livelihoods through main 
season seeds & tool and dry season 
fish & vegetable kit distribution in 
IPC Phase 3
··Extend support for market 
functionality
··Implement emergency livestock 
interventions and distribute 
vegetable main season cereal crop 
kits in IPC Phase 3
··Procure additional 25% of 
emergency food and livelihoods 
pipeline


··Implement activities to help sustain 
community coping mechanisms 
and build resilience
··Extend protection of livelihood 
support to include capacity 
building, seed multiplication sites 
and other diversification actions 
··Procure additional 25% of 
emergency food and livelihoods 
pipeline 


··Implement essential primary 
healthcare emergency clinical 
packages targeting the most 
vulnerable displaced populations
··Immunize the most vulnerable 
displaced groups (children U5, 
pregnant and lactating women 
(PLW)) 
··Implement outbreak investigation 
and response 
··Procure 30% of emergency health 
pipeline
··Mainstream accountability to 
affected people


··Expand essential primary 
healthcare emergency services to 
20 locations, to include HIV/AIDS/
TB care and reproductive health 
services (including SGBV)
··Implement integrated response for 
severe acute malnutrition (SAM) 
with medical complications
··Implement integrated response 
for epidemic prone communicable 
diseases including diarrheal, vector, 
Viral Hemorrhagic diseases with 
WASH/Nutrition/FSL
··Emergency health protection for 
people with disabilities
··Procure 25% of emergency health 
pipeline


··Referrals for comprehensive 
emergency obstetric and newborn 
care
··Minor trauma and surgery
··Scale up TB/HIV/AIDS/disability care
··Scale up integrated response to 
SAM with medical complications
··Procure 25% of emergency health 
pipeline


··Scale up all priority activities
··Procure 20% of emergency health 
pipeline







Cluster

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+



·· Manage SAM and moderate acute 
malnutrition (MAM) for children 
U5 in counties with GAM = 20%, 
with population in IPC 5 and 
experiencing active conflict
··Infant and Young Child Nutrition 
counseling at nutrition sites.


··Manage SAM and MAM for children 
under 5 in counties >15% - 19% 
··Conduct Infant and Young Child 
Nutrition counseling at nutrition 
sites and community 
··Manage MAM among pregnant 
and lactating women (PLW) in 12 
counties with GAM >20% 
··SMART surveys in some of the 
locations 
··Implementation of minimum 
integrated response packages from 
Health, WASH, FSL GBV/Protection 
and Education


··Manage MAM among all PLW in 
all remaining 66 counties of the 
country 
··Monitor nutrition situation using 
multiple strategies 


··Provide blanket supplementary 
feeding among U5 and PLW in 54 
selected counties 


··Implement the following Tier 1 
& 2 activities in Tier 1 locations & 
implement Tier 1 activities in Tier 2 
locations:
··Tier 1 Activities: mobile and 
static protection assessment and 
monitoring; protection by presence 
and protective accompaniment; 
comprehensive case management; 
psychosocial support (PSS); safe 
referrals, including information 
dissemination on available services; 
women and girls friendly spaces 
programming; legal awareness, 
assistance and counseling for 
survivors and HL, including training 
police and justice authorities; 
Individual Protection Assistance; 
survey and clearance of explosive 
hazards 
··Tier 2 Activities: protection 
awareness raising and prevention 
messaging; community-based 
protection preparedness and risk 
mitigation; IGA and livelihood for 
protective purposes for persons of 
concern; mine risk education


··Implement Tier 1 activities in Tier 3 
locations, Tier 3 activities in Tier 1 
locations, Tier 2 activities in Tier 2 
Locations Tier 3 activities: Housing, 
land and property programming; 
peacebuilding and peaceful 
coexistence; community-based 
initiatives for durable solutions 
programming


··Implement Tier 3 activities in Tier 2 
locations, and Tier 2 activities in Tier 
3 locations


··Implement Tier 3 activities in Tier 
3 locations


··Implement frontline WASH 
response amongst PoC sites and 
newly displaced population in 9 
most vulnerable counties 
··Fund 25% of the emergency 
preparedness and response and 
mobile response activity 
··Procure 30% of WASH pipeline and 
preposition cholera WASH supplies 
for WASH, Health and Nutrition 
··Fund 25% of UNICEF activities 
through Programme Cooperation 
Agreements (PCAs)


··Implement frontline WASH mobile 
response in additional 11 priority 
counties with acute malnutrition 
and newly displaced populations, 
50% of the EP and R/mobile 
response activities
··Procure additional 30% of core 
pipeline
··Fund additional 25% of UNICEF 
activities through PCAs


··Implement frontline WASH 
response in 19 additional priority 
counties based on exposure to 
conflict, acute malnutrition and 
AWD 
··Procure 20% of core pipeline 
··Fund additional 25% of UNICEF 
activities through PCAs 


··Implement WASH response in 
remaining counties 
··Procure remaining 20% of pipeline
··Fund final 25% of UNICEF activities 
through PCAs 


··Ensure dedicated UNDSS support 
for humanitarian operations
··Coordinate prioritised humanitarian 
response and conduct access 
negotiations
··Undertake critical needs 
assessments
··Conduct priority CwC activities


··Reinforce NGO coordination
·· Sustain dedicated UNDSS support 
for humanitarian operations
·· Sustain coordination of prioritised 
humanitarian response and conduct 
access negotiations
·· Scale up needs assessments
·· Scale up CwC activities


··Sustain dedicated UNDSS support 
for humanitarian operations
·· Implement strategic coordination 
initiatives


··Sustain dedicated UNDSS support 
for humanitarian operations
·· Implement all outstanding 
coordination activities


··Deliver 1,521mt 
··Transport 700 UNHAS passengers
··Transport 14mt UNHAS light cargo


··Deliver 3,042mt 
··Transport 1,500 UNHAS passengers 
··Transport 26mt UNHAS light cargo


··Deliver 4,562mt
··Transport 3,300 UNHAS passengers
··Transport 75mt UNHAS light cargo


··Deliver 6,082mt
··Transport 4,500-6,000 UNHAS 
passengers
··Transport 80-100mt UNHAS light 
cargo






+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+



OPERATIONAL

CAPACITY

In 2019, a total of 183 humanitarian organizations will implement projects under 
the Humanitarian Response Plan, of which nearly 60 per cent are local. 

Some 105 local NGOs, 67 international NGOs and 11 United 
Nations entities have included projects in the response 
plan. More than 150 additional organizations are operating 
emergency programmes in South Sudan outside the HRP, 
including partners such as the Red Cross Movement, with 
whom HRP actors collaborate and coordinate closely. The 
number of active partners increased across all clusters during 
2018. This included an increase in the number of women-led 
organizations. Continuing the trend from previous years and 
in line with World Humanitarian Summit commitments, 
the response will promote meaningful partnerships between 
South Sudanese and international humanitarian actors.35 
As portrayed by the map below, humanitarian partners are 
present in every county. Further efforts will be made in 2019 
to ensure sufficient operational capacity to respond to people’s 
needs in remote and hard-to-reach areas. To this end, the 
HCT will consider new operational models, including setting 
up operational centres in key locations. 



SEVERITY OF NEEDS AND OPERATIONAL PRESENCE

AbyeiLakesCentralEquatoriaEastern EquatoriaUpper NileWestern Bahr elGhazalUnityNorthern 
Bahr el 
GhazalJongleiWarrapWestern Equatoria
11 - 2021 - 4040+
6 - 10 
1 - 5Number of humanitarian partners in 2018Severity of needs-+
Source: OCHA and humanitarian partners 



OPERATIONAL RESPONSE TO

HUMANITARIAN ACCESS

In 2019, the humanitarian community will seek to prioritize and address those 
access constraints that have the greatest impact on a rapid, consistent and 
principled response to people’s needs.

The signing of the R-ARCSS may offer humanitarians a more 
enabling operating environment in 2019, after considerable 
challenges throughout 2018 in their ability to reach affected 
people with consistent and principled assistance and 
protection. Acknowledging that constrained access exacerbates 
humanitarian needs, the humanitarian community will take 
a more strategic approach to access in 2019, while remaining 
flexible in consideration of the fluid operational context. This 
will include continued focus on sustaining and expanding 
humanitarian access and creating an administrative and 
operational environment more conducive to principled 
humanitarian action. Beyond enhancing security risk mitigation 
measures, humanitarians will continue to pursue greater 
community sensitization and acceptance, situational awareness, 
and negotiations with relevant authorities and actors. 

The inter-agency Access Working Group will continue to 
develop strategies and recommendations for the ICWG and 
HCT to enable the most vulnerable communities’ access to 
the assistance and protection they need. Collective efforts, 
supported by OCHA, will include joint monitoring and context 
analysis, development of common positions and policies to 
encourage a systematic and coordinated approach among 
partners, support to advocacy initiatives at all levels, and 
capacity building of partners to respond to access impediments. 

Where impediments exist at the local level, OCHA and 
access-focused partners will lead efforts to resolve them 
through necessary support to negotiations with key 
interlocutors by operational agencies – building on the 
comparative advantages of diverse humanitarian partners 
and engagement with a broader range of actors, such as 
community and faith-based groups. 2019 will also see 
continued high-level field visits that emphasize principled and 
sustained humanitarian assistance.

HUMANITARIAN ACCESS CONSTRAINTS

Western Bahr el GhazalWarrapUnityLakesWestern EquatoriaCentral EquatoriaEastern EquatoriaJongleiUpper NileAbyeiNorthern Bahrel GhazalSeverity of access constraintsHighMediumLow36
AID WORKERS KILLED

15

AID WORKERS 
DETAINED

115

AID WORKERS 
RELOCATED 

564

PEOPLE IN HIGH 
ACCESS CONSTRAINT 
AREAS 

1.5M

(Jan - Nov 2018)

Source: OCHA focus group discussions (July - Aug 2018)



RESPONSE

MONITORING

Humanitarian partners will build on continued efforts to regularly monitor and 
analyse the situation and ongoing response. In 2018, this incorporated more 
robust collective efforts to track the needs of crisis-affected people on a biweekly 
and quarterly basis and to tailor the response to reach the most vulnerable 
people in areas of greatest need. 

Monitoring framework

In 2019, monitoring efforts within the Humanitarian 
Programme Cycle will incorporate needs analysis and 
response tracking, to articulate collectively across sectors 
how the situation has changed for affected women, men 
and children. Periodic reviews will be undertaken to gauge 
progress made against the targets set for key indicators toward 
each HRP strategic objective and highlight where integrated 
response has made an impact. Periodic monitoring exercises 
will be timed to inform the HCT’s collective re-assessment of 
the response, following the first and third quarters of the year. 
These points in time will allow the HCT to observe possible 
evolution on larger-scale trends, related to returns or other 
solutions being sought by displaced people, disease outbreaks, 
and food security and nutrition needs. 

Given the operational demands on partners to undertake 
continuous assessment, prioritization and adjustments to 
delivery, the reporting related to periodic monitoring will 
be kept light, leveraging existing monthly and quarterly data 
collection efforts for either existing OCHA products or other 
demands. Periodic monitoring will be based on existing 
cluster and information management capacity, supported by 
the inter-agency Information Management Working Group to 
strengthen sex and age disaggregation of data.

An ICWG consultative group will support the monitoring 
and tracking process, coordinated by OCHA on behalf of 
the HCT. The group will re-assess the approach at the end of 
2019 to maintain focus on the above monitoring priorities. 
The framework will run in parallel and speak to UNCF 
monitoring, connecting at key shared points, such the 
indicators used to monitor the collective outcomes articulated 
in the New Way of Working.

Monitoring reports and products

Clusters will monitor on a monthly basis the primary indicator(s) 
they select as proxies to reflect progress in the overall cluster 
response against the HRP targets , detailed in the Annex. These 
are, mostly, output indicators of numbers of people accessing a 
specific type of assistance or service. These results, along with 
the number and type of partners participating in the cluster 
response, will be reported either in Humanitarian Dashboards 
of monthly response, or contribute to periodic monitoring 
products, according to the indicative calendar below. 

In April, the clusters will contribute to a periodic review of the 
collective response, organized by the HRP strategic objectives. 
This will include a renewed assessment of needs, following 
the quarterly exercise by the Needs Analysis Working Group, 
and incorporating the results of the biannual IPC analysis. The 
analysis in the periodic review will draw from a set of indicators 
under each strategic objective to capture the impacts of the 
response achieved during the dry season, usually from January 
to March-April, which facilitates delivery by road and river. 
This exercise will be renewed at the end of the third quarter to 
inform the next HNO and a concise monitoring report. Needs 
analysis and response monitoring will be used to inform the 
South Sudan Humanitarian Fund allocations, which focus on 
HRP partners.

Jan

Feb

Mar

Apr

May

Jun

Jul

Aug

Sep

Oct

Nov

Dec

Humanitarian Needs Overview

X

Humanitarian Response Plan

X

Humanitarian Dashboard

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

HRP Year in Review

X

Periodic Monitoring Review

X

X

SSHF Standard Allocation

X

X

SSHF Annual Report

X







SUMMARY OF

NEEDS, TARGETS & 
REQUIREMENTS 

 
HEALTHPROTECTIONCAMP COORDINATION 
AND CAMP 
MANAGEMENTSouth 
SudaneseRefugeesTotalSouth 
SudaneseRefugeesTotalSouth 
SudaneseRefugeesTotalEDUCATIONNUTRITIONEMERGENCY SHELTER& NON-FOOD ITEMSFOOD SECURITYAND LIVELIHOODSWATER, SANITATION 
AND HYGIENECLUSTERPEOPLE IN 
NEEDPEOPLE 
TARGETEDREQUIREMENTS 
(US$)
TOTAL0.3M6.8M7.1M5.4M0.3M5.7M121M1.4B1.5B0.3M1.4M0.9M18.8M1.7M0.3M2.3M21.1M1.2M0.16M2.8M0.8M53.9M2.9M0.16M10.5M64.4M0.9M0.3M1.7M1.0M30.1M2.0M0.3M25.3M55.4M1.3M0.3M5.8M5.1M650.0M6.1M0.3M30.1M680.1M5.4M0.3M3.6M1.8M120.0M3.9M0.3M15.3M135.3M2.1M0.3M1.5M1.0M180.0M1.8M0.3M7.0M187.0M1.3M0.3M5.7M3.3M100.0M6.0M0.3M21.0M121.0M3.6M0.3M5.7M3.0M129.6M6.0M0.3M9.4M139.0M3.3M

PART II: OPERATIONAL

RESPONSE PLANS

Note: Sectoral financial requirements for refugees, and the number 
of refugees in need of and targeted for assistance, are integrated 
in the figures of people in need, people targeted and sector 
requirements under each sector sidebar, while the breakdowns 
are shown in the table at the bottom of each sector page. For full 
details regarding the refugee response, please refer to the Refugee 
Response Plan, which outlines the refugee response strategy and 
aggregates all financial requirements for the refugee response.

Camp Coordination and Camp Management 

Education 

Emergency Shelter and Non-Food Items

Food Security and Livelihoods

Health

Nutrition

Protection

Water, Sanitation and Hygiene

Coordination and Common Services

Logistics

Refugee Response Plan

Abyei Response Plan



PART II: camp coordination and CAMP MANAGEMENT

CAMP COORDINATION AND

CAMP MANAGEMENT (CCCM)

PEOPLE IN NEED

1.7M 

Strategy and key changes from 2018

The cluster aims to ensure displaced people’s 
equitable access to services in camps and camp-
like settings and their self-reliance to avoid 
excess dependency on humanitarian assistance. 
Compared to 2018, the cluster will expand 
its activities further into camp-like settings, 
where the core intention of CCCM actors will 
be to strengthen accountable, community-
led governance mechanisms. In addition to 
continued work in existing sites, the cluster 
will remain flexible to deploy mobile teams 
for emergency situations or in long-standing 
camp-like settings, based on people’s needs. The 
cluster will stand ready to provide temporary 
support to displaced people searching for 
durable solutions, while facing challenges 
related to housing, land and property. 

Targeting and prioritization 

By the end of September 2018, the cluster 
had reached 52 per cent of the approximately 
826,000 South Sudanese targeted.37 In 2019, 
CCCM sector actors aim to support some 
855,000 South Sudanese and some 300,000 
refugees. The reduction in the cluster target 
is explained by a more comprehensive review 
of IDP numbers and partner capacity to 
respond. The cluster will prioritize the most 
vulnerable displaced people in PoC sites, 
collective centres, spontaneous and informal 
settlements, and other camp-like settings. The 
participation of women and people with special 
needs will be promoted in site governance 
structures. Informed by severity analysis 
and response capacity, the main geographic 
areas of work are Unity, Upper Nile, Western 
Bahr el Ghazal, Jonglei, Lakes and Central 
Equatoria. Programmatically, the cluster will 
prioritize coordination of assistance at site level; 
integration of participatory and community-
based approaches into camp management 
activities; and local ownership of site 
management, particularly in camp-like settings. 

Integration 

By its nature, the cluster focuses on ensuring 
quality service provision to displaced 
populations across sectors in camps and 
camp-like settings. The cluster will support 
integrated services in these contexts by further 
strengthening already existing information 
management systems and intention surveys, 
therefore further enhancing programme 
coordination. CCCM partners will work with 
the Protection Cluster on safe referrals and 
GBV mainstreaming, including supporting 
PSEA, and strengthen engagement with 
clusters including WASH and ES/NFI actors.

Quality programming

The cluster facilitates humanitarian 
organizations’ communication and feedback 
loops with affected communities to ensure 
dignified and needs-based services in camps 
and camp-like settings and links to the CCE 
working group to promote accountability 
to affected people. CCCM partners are 
permanent members of local and national 
Solutions Working Groups, with a focus on 
ensuring quality community engagement and 
related information management. The cluster 
works to strengthen communities’ capacity 
to self-manage displacement sites and rebuild 
their lives, with the intention of reducing 
reliance on humanitarian support, creating 
linkages with government service provision, 
and preparing conditions for longer-term 
development interventions. 

PEOPLE TARGETED

1.2M 

SECTOR REQUIREMENTS (US$)

21M 

4239 
partnersLNGOsINGOsUNNumber of humanitarian partners
CLUSTER PARTNERS

CLUSTER OBJECTIVE 1

1Ensure displaced populations’ 
equal and needs-based access 
to improved quality services. 
RELATES TO SO1

CLUSTER OBJECTIVE 2

2Engage and respond to 
vulnerable populations with 
priority on addressing protection 
gaps and building resilience. 
RELATES TO SO2

CLUSTER OBJECTIVE 3

3Promote relevant community 
participation and ensure local 
ownership of site management. 
RELATES TO SO3

CLUSTER OBJECTIVE 4

4Prioritize new and unreached 
displaced populations. 
RELATES TO SO1, SO2 & SO3

BREAKDOWN OF PEOPLE IN NEED AND TARGETED BY STATUS, SEX AND AGE

 0.3M 1.4M - - 1.7M 
0.3M 0.9M - -53%61 | 35 | 4PEOPLE IN NEED 
PEOPLE TARGETEDFINANCIAL 
REQUIREMENTS61 | 35 | 453%
1.2M 
RefugeesIDPsHost 
communi-
tiesOtherwise 
affectedSector 
total% female% children, 
adult, older 
person*
BY STATUSBY SEX & AGE*Children (<18 years old), adult 
(18-59 years), elderly (>59 years)$18.8M$21.1M$2.3M
CONTACT

Richard Okello, 
rokello@iom.int 

Olwyn Goulding, 
olwyn.goulding@acted.org

Changaiz Mata-ul-Hussain, 
changaiz@unhcr.org 

20



EDUCATION

PEOPLE IN NEED

2.9M

Strategy and key changes from 2018

In 2019, the education response aims to 
ensure that children and youth (3-18 years) 
have access to quality formal and non-formal 
education and that girls and boys already in 
school are retained. Recognizing that South 
Sudan has one of the highest rates of out-of-
school children in the world, the cluster will 
prioritize new enrolments and retention in 
2019. By providing access to safe learning 
spaces, children can benefit from key life-
saving and life-sustaining activities such as 
psychosocial support, WASH education, 
and school meals. Education partners 
will strengthen education personnel’s and 
governance bodies’ capacities through 
training. The cluster aims to build resilience 
through cognitive and social development of 
children and youth.

Targeting and prioritization 

By the end of September 2018, the cluster 
had reached 95 per cent of the approximately 
674,000 South Sudanese children targeted, 
of whom 41 per cent are girls and 59 per 
cent boys.38 In 2019, education sector actors 
aim to target 876,000 South Sudanese 
and some 160,000 refugees. Some 97 per 
cent of them are children and youth and 3 
per cent education personnel. The cluster 
response will prioritize areas with limited 
or no schools, significant IDP presence and 
acute food needs. While the response will 
be primarily static, the cluster will remain 
flexible to accommodate new emergencies or 
population movements through provision of 
temporary learning spaces. Conflict-affected 
areas will be prioritized for life skills and 
basic vocational training opportunities for 
youth and adolescents.39 Girls’ enrolment will 
be promoted.

Integration 

Education partners will collaborate with 
Child Protection and GBV Sub-Clusters to 
roll out psychosocial support training to 
promote student well-being in instances where 
children and teachers have been victims of 
trauma, GBV and psychosocial stress due to 
recent emergencies or chronic crisis. WASH 
and Education Clusters will work to connect 
schools with safe water points, construct 
secure and gender-appropriate toilets and 
handwashing facilities, and increase hygiene 
promotion. The Education Cluster will 
prioritize school meals in food insecure 
locations to address hunger and cognitive 
under-development, with the support of the 
FSL Cluster. Education partners will support 
Nutrition and Health objectives by using 
schools to screen children under age 5 for 
malnutrition and disease.

Quality programming

The cluster will broaden its engagement and 
coordination with development partners, 
such as the Global Partnership for Education 
and Girls Education South Sudan, in 2019 to 
identify transition points from humanitarian 
to development programming. National 
ownership and sustainability of education 
interventions will be considered through 
the Education Cluster’s investments in 
local capacity building and increasing 
engagement of local NGOs. School 
management committees and parent-teacher 
associations will facilitate communication 
with communities and appropriateness of the 
education response.

PEOPLE TARGETED

916K

SECTOR REQUIREMENTS (US$)

64M

CLUSTER PARTNERS

141924 
partnersLNGOsINGOsUNNumber of humanitarian partners
CLUSTER OBJECTIVE 1

1 Increase access to inclusive and 
protective lifesaving education 
(formal and non-formal) for 
children and youth affected by 
emergencies. 
RELATES TO SO1

CLUSTER OBJECTIVE 2

2 Improve the quality of education 
to ensure continuity of relevant 
education services for children 
and youth in emergencies. 
RELATES TO SO2

CLUSTER OBJECTIVE 3

3 Strengthen the response capacity 
of communities and education 
actors to mitigate the impact of 
emergencies on children and youth. 
RELATES TO SO3

BREAKDOWN OF PEOPLE IN NEED AND TARGETED BY STATUS, SEX AND AGE

49%
42%
97 | 3 | -
97 | 3 | -
PEOPLE IN NEED 
PEOPLE TARGETEDFINANCIAL 
REQUIREMENTS0.16M0.9M1.9M0.16M 0.6M2.9M0.9M0.2M-
-
RefugeesIDPsHost 
communitiesOtherwise 
affectedSector 
total% female% children, 
adult, older 
person*
BY STATUSBY SEX & AGE*Children (<18 years old), adult 
(18-59 years), elderly (>59 years)$53.9M$64.4M$10.5M
CONTACT

Jumma Khan, 
edclusterjuba.un@gmail.com 

Bazgha Iftikhar, 
edclusterjuba.ngo@gmail.com



PART II: Emergency shelter and NON-FOOD ITEMS

EMERGENCY SHELTER AND

NON-FOOD ITEMS


PEOPLE IN NEED

2.0M 

Strategy and key changes from 2018

The ES/NFI Cluster aims to ensure that IDPs, 
returnees and vulnerable host communities 
can live in safety and dignity through 
access to household services and support. 
Strengthening communities’ self-reliance 
and positive coping mechanisms will remain 
key. Compared to 2018, the cluster expects to 
support an increasing number of vulnerable 
returnees in 2019. Through increased cash 
transfer programming, the cluster will shift 
its emphasis from the provision of ES/NFIs to 
ensuring vulnerable people’s access to support. 

Targeting and prioritization 

By the end of September 2018, the cluster 
had reached 70 per cent of the approximately 
969,000 South Sudanese targeted.40 In 2019, 
ES/NFI sector actors aim to support 1 million 
South Sudanese and some 300,000 refugees. 
The cluster will target vulnerable people 
unable to support themselves with life-saving 
shelter and NFI, prioritizing newly displaced 
IDPs. ES/NFI partners will use evidence-based 
displacement trends to target specific locations 
along displacement routes, reducing multiple 
distributions to the same individuals. The 
cluster will pilot and determine the feasibility 
of the use of biometric data in 2019, in 
collaboration with the Displacement Tracking 
Matrix. In stable market locations, the cluster 
will conduct resilience interventions only. 
In locations receiving returnees, the cluster 
will work with the new Housing, Land and 
Property Sub-Cluster to analyze the security 
of tenure before providing shelter services. 
The Protection Cluster will lead the ES/NFI 
response in parts of the country that hold 
small caseloads of vulnerable people left 
behind during population displacements, 
typically in heavily militarized areas. 

Integration 

The ES/NFI Cluster leads an integrated 
survival kit response in hard-to-access 
locations, prioritizing counties in IPC Phase 
4 and 5. The multi-sector kit includes health, 
hygiene, nutrition, protection and ES/NFI 
services and is facilitated by the Logistics 
Cluster. For example, through kitchen sets, 
the ES/NFI Cluster works to reduce food 
insecurity and improve hygiene conditions, 
while the provision of blankets aims to reduce 
pneumonia. ES/NFI projects on community 
engagement will contribute to improved 
education and peacebuilding. 

Quality programming

The cluster piloted a new Accountability 
to Affected People tool for assistance and 
response in 2018. In 2019, it will build on 
the lessons learned to support standardized 
community-led complaints and feedback 
mechanisms, skills training, and leadership 
committees, with due inclusion of 
marginalized and physically vulnerable groups. 
Conflict and gender sensitive programming 
and the principle of ‘do no harm’ are 
mainstreamed throughout ES/NFI support, 
particularly regarding GBV, HIV and housing, 
land and property issues. With the ambition of 
preparing communities for longer-term shelter 
solutions, the cluster will implement CTP 
and skills training, while also coordinating 
with development partners to avoid overlap 
and ensure appropriate transition of support. 
Shelter rehabilitation through restricted 
vouchers and unrestricted cash will drive down 
the cluster’s financial requirements over time.

PEOPLE TARGETED

1.3M 

SECTOR REQUIREMENTS (US$)

55M

1221226partnersINGOsLNGOsUNNumber of humanitarian partners
CLUSTER PARTNERS

CLUSTER OBJECTIVE 1

1 Improve access to safe, 
appropriate emergency shelter 
and life-saving NFIs to newly 
displaced or vulnerable populations in 
secondary displacement. 
RELATES TO SO1 & SO2

CLUSTER OBJECTIVE 2

2 Improve the living conditions 
of highly vulnerable IDPs 
in protracted displacement, 
returnees and host communities 
unable to meet their ES/NFI needs. 
RELATES TO SO1 & SO2

CLUSTER OBJECTIVE 3

3 Support most vulnerable 
returnees, host communities and 
IDPs in secondary displacement 
rebuild lives through shelter and NFI 
solutions.
RELATES TO SO3

BREAKDOWN OF PEOPLE IN NEED AND TARGETED BY STATUS, SEX AND AGE

52%
52%
57 | 41 | 257 | 41 | 2PEOPLE IN NEED 
PEOPLE TARGETEDFINANCIAL 
REQUIREMENTS0.3M1.2M0.1M0.3M0.9M0.07M0.02M0.4M2M1.3MRefugeesIDPsHost 
communitiesOtherwise 
affectedSector 
total% female% children, 
adult, older 
person*
BY STATUSBY SEX & AGE*Children (<18 years old), adult 
(18-59 years), elderly (>59 years)$30.1M$55.4M$25.3M
CONTACT

Cornelius Weira, 
coord.south-sudan@
sheltercluster.org

Elizabeth Mayer, 
Elizabeth_Mayer@wvi.org

22



PART II: food security AndLIVELIHOODS

FOOD SECURITY AND

LIVELIHOODS


PEOPLE IN NEED

6.1M 

PEOPLE TARGETED

5.4M 

Strategy and key changes from 2018

The cluster aims to prevent famine and build 
households’ coping capacities by providing 
life-sustaining and life-saving food, livelihoods 
and livestock assistance, increasing food 
production, and building productive assets 
for more sustainable livelihoods. While 
unconditional food will be provided in 
areas at highest risk of famine, the cluster 
will in general shift towards transitional 
food and cash assistance compared to 2018, 
with the aim of supporting households’ and 
communities’ self-reliance and restoring 
community assets. Building on the progress 
made in 2018, the cluster will continue to 
increase river transport in areas previously 
served by air.

Targeting and prioritization 

By the end of September 2018, the cluster had 
reached 84 per cent of the 5.2 million South 
Sudanese targeted.41 In 2019, FSL sector actors 
aim to support 5.1 million South Sudanese 
and some 300,000 refugees. The cluster will 
use the IPC classification to prioritize the 
allocation of limited resources. It will target 
all people in IPC Phase 4 and 5 counties 
with unconditional food or cash assistance 
throughout the year and with seasonal 
livelihood and livestock support. Between 
80 and 85 per cent of people in IPC Phase 3 
counties will receive transitional food and cash 
support between April and September and 
complementary livelihood assistance during 
both the main farming and lean seasons. The 
cluster will also target IDPs living in PoC sites. 

Integration 

The food security, livelihoods and nutrition 
pipelines are closely integrated through 
a high-level agreement among the three 
respective lead agencies. The FSL Cluster 
works in an integrated manner with Health, 
WASH, Nutrition and, increasingly, Protection 
Clusters on a famine risk mitigation minimum 
package of services, building on the successful 
experiences from 2017 and 2018. The cluster 
participates in inter-sectoral rapid response 
mechanisms to support people in hard-to-
reach locations. Some FSL actors implement 
integrated multi-sector interventions either 
as part of consortiums or individually with 
funding and expertise across multiple sectors.

Quality programming

The cluster has systematically increased its 
accountability to affected people. For example, 
almost all food distribution sites operate 
through a Project Management Committee 
that facilitates feedback and complaint 
mechanisms. FSL programming is informed 
by conflict sensitive analysis to ensure that 
assistance does not exacerbate tensions 
between different social and ethnic groups, 
and that GBV and child protection risks are 
mitigated during food distributions. The FSL 
Cluster promotes cash transfer programming 
in South Sudan, including the use of multi-
purpose and conditional cash and vouchers. 
It also coordinates its services closely with 
development actors, including the World 
Bank’s social safety net programme.

SECTOR REQUIREMENTS (US$)

680M

3923273 
partnersLNGOsINGOsUNNumber of humanitarian partners
CLUSTER PARTNERS

CLUSTER OBJECTIVE 1

1Provide unconditional food 
assistance to prevent famine 
and improve food consumption, 
dietary diversity and coping strategies 
for vulnerable populations.
RELATES TO SO1

CLUSTER OBJECTIVE 2

2Enhance emergency 
food production through 
complementary vegetable and 
crop seeds and fishing and livestock 
support. 
RELATES TO SO1 

CLUSTER OBJECTIVE 3

3Provide transitional emergency 
food assistance to strengthen 
coping capacities and reduce 
reliance on general food distributions. 
RELATES TO SO1 

BREAKDOWN OF PEOPLE IN NEED AND TARGETED BY STATUS, SEX AND AGE

CLUSTER OBJECTIVE 4

4Reduce dependency on food and 
agricultural input to support and 
strengthen households’ ability to 
absorb shocks. 
RELATES TO SO3 

49%
49%
53 | 44 | 353 | 44 | 3PEOPLE IN NEED 
PEOPLE TARGETEDFINANCIAL 
REQUIREMENTS0.3M1.9M3.7M0.3M1.9M3.0M6.1M5.4M0.2M0.2MRefugeesIDPsHost 
communitiesOtherwise 
affectedSector 
total% female% children, 
adult, older 
person*
BY STATUSBY SEX & AGE*Children (<18 years old), adult 
(18-59 years), elderly (>59 years)$650.0M$680.1M$30.1M
CONTACT

Alistair Short, 
alistair.short@wfp.org

Ntando Mlobane, 
ntando_mlobane@wvi.org 

23



HEALTH 

PEOPLE IN NEED

3.9M 

Strategy and key changes from 2018

The cluster will provide lifesaving emergency 
healthcare access to vulnerable populations, 
focusing on major causes of morbidity and 
mortality. Health partners aim to increase 
the predictability and functionality of health 
services by supporting primary health care 
facilities and hospitals and establishing mobile 
clinics. The cluster aims to prevent, detect 
and respond to epidemic-prone diseases, 
and to increase resilience among vulnerable 
populations through greater use of mental 
health and psychosocial support services. 
Health partners will further integrate their 
services with FSL, Nutrition, Protection and 
WASH Clusters. 

Targeting and prioritization 

By the end of September 2018, the cluster 
had reached 83 per cent of the 2.1 million 
South Sudanese targeted.42 In 2019, health 
sector actors aim to support 1.8 million 
South Sudanese and some 300,000 refugees. 
The cluster will target IDPs in PoC sites and 
host communities, refugees, and vulnerable 
members of host communities. Most 
vulnerable people in the country include GBV 
survivors, severely malnourished children 
with medical complications and people with 
noncommunicable diseases. Health partners 
will adjust the response according to outbreaks 
and seasonal upsurges in epidemic-prone 
diseases, such as measles, meningitis and 
hepatitis E, and to the rainy season’s impact 
on malaria and diarrheal diseases, like cholera 
and typhoid. Emergency clinical packages will 
be prioritized throughout the year, informed 
by periodic vulnerability and risk assessments. 

Integration 

The Health Cluster will provide a minimum 
package of integrated services with FSL, 
Nutrition, Protection and WASH Clusters, 
targeting high priority locations with the 
most severe needs. To prevent the spread of 
diseases, WASH support will be increasingly 
integrated at health and nutrition facilities, 
including water supply, quality testing and 
monitoring. The Health Cluster will build 
nutrition actors’ capacity to screen and refer 
severely malnourished children with medical 
complications, such as malaria. Health and 
protection partners will undertake joint 
responses and mapping of services to address 
intersectoral needs, such as GBV, and to 
overcome barriers to accessing health care 
for GBV survivors. This will involve the GBV 
Sub-Cluster sensitizing health care workers 
on survivor-centred approaches and referral 
pathways.

Quality programming

The cluster will strengthen its linkages 
with health actors focused on longer-term 
interventions. Humanitarian and development 
partners will conduct joint mapping of health 
services and quarterly joint assessments of 
health support provided. The cluster will 
coordinate closely with health services 
operated outside of the HRP, such as those 
funded by the Health Pooled Fund or 
delivered by organizations such as ICRC and 
MSF, and advocate for development funding 
to increase readiness for unforeseen health 
emergencies. Health partners will continue 
to emphasize accountability to affected 
people, conducting community consultations 
to identify priority needs and adjust health 
responses based on people’s experience. 

PEOPLE TARGETED

2.1M 

SECTOR REQUIREMENTS (US$)

135M 

2642454partnersINGOsLNGOsUNNumber of humanitarian partners
CLUSTER PARTNERS

CLUSTER OBJECTIVE 1

1 Improve access and scale-up 
responsiveness to integrated 
essential healthcare needs of 
vulnerable populations. 
RELATES TO SO1

CLUSTER OBJECTIVE 2

2 Prevent, detect and respond 
to epidemic-prone disease 
outbreaks. 
RELATES TO SO1

CLUSTER OBJECTIVE 3

3 Increase access to essential 
clinical health services among 
vulnerable populations.
RELATES TO SO2

CLUSTER OBJECTIVE 4

4 Improve resilience among 
vulnerable populations by 
increasing access to mental 
health and psychosocial support 
services. 
RELATES TO SO3

BREAKDOWN OF PEOPLE IN NEED AND TARGETED BY STATUS, SEX AND AGE

50%
50%
47 | x | x47 | x | xPEOPLE IN NEED 
PEOPLE TARGETEDFINANCIAL 
REQUIREMENTS0.3M3.6M-
--
-
1.8M0.3M3.9M2.1MRefugeesIDPsHost 
communitiesOtherwise 
affectedSector 
total% female% children, 
adult, older 
person*
BY STATUSBY SEX & AGE*Children (<18 years old), adult 
(18-59 years), elderly (>59 years)$120.1M$135.4M$15.3M
CONTACT

Magda Armah, 
armahm@who.int

Fikru Zeleke, 
fikru.zeleke@gmail.com



NUTRITION 

PEOPLE IN NEED

2.1M

PEOPLE TARGETED

1.3M 

Strategy and key changes from 2018

Nutrition partners’ primary goal is to prevent 
and treat malnutrition and undernutrition 
and promote good health among vulnerable 
groups. In 2019, the cluster will scale up 
integrated services among Nutrition, FSL, 
Health and WASH Clusters at nutrition and 
health facilities to address interrelated and 
under-lying causes of malnutrition, such 
as food insecurity, suboptimal childcare 
and feeding practices, and lack of safe 
water and sanitation. Compared to 2018, 
nutrition partners will increase the volume 
of prevention activities and build on the 
successes of community-based management of 
acute malnutrition. 

Targeting and prioritization 

By the end of September 2018, the cluster 
had reached 68 per cent of the 1.1 million 
South Sudanese targeted. In 2019, nutrition 
sector actors aim to support 1 million South 
Sudanese and some 300,000 refugees, a 
lower number due to a lower burden and 
tighter prioritization. The cluster response 
will prioritize life-saving treatment services 
targeting children under five years and 
pregnant and lactating women, in compliance 
with relevant national guidelines. These are the 
most vulnerable groups to malnutrition due 
to their increased biological and physiological 
needs. Geographically, the response will 
prioritize areas of high malnutrition, food 
insecurity (IPC Phase 4 and 5), conflict and 
internal displacement. The cluster will expand 
its blanket supplementary feeding programme 
in the Greater Equatorias to halt the deepening 
of the malnutrition crisis in the region. 

Integration 

Nutrition sites will act as hubs for integrated 
programming. Health partners will test 
and treat malaria among the severely acute 
malnourished children being treated at the 
sites, while WASH partners will provide 
NFI kits to severely malnourished children’s 
families. Early childhood development 
stimulation activities will be integrated at 
stabilization centres and nutrition sites. In 
collaboration with FSL partners, nutrition 
partners will establish kitchen gardens at 
nutrition sites to demonstrate recommended 
feeding practices. Nutrition services will be 
considered as potential entry points for GBV 
victims looking for assistance, with nutrition 
staff trained on GBV referral pathways. The 
Protection Cluster will perform safety audits 
and assessments of nutrition sites. 

Quality programming

To further localize the response, the cluster will 
strengthen the Ministry of Health’s capacity on 
nutrition interventions and train local NGOs 
on the new national guidelines on community-
based management of malnutrition and 
maternal, infant, and young child nutrition. The 
cluster will employ a gender-sensitive approach 
to mitigate any obstacles compromising women 
and girls’ ability to receive nutrition support. 
Women’s participation will be encouraged in 
programme design and feedback mechanisms. 
The cluster will collaborate with existing 
and planned development interventions 
on nutrition, such as those funded by the 
World Bank and Health Pooled Fund. Digital 
beneficiary management will be piloted in 
parts of the country to improve targeting and 
information management. 

SECTOR REQUIREMENTS (US$)

187M 

CLUSTER PARTNERS

1632645partnersINGOsLNGOsUNNumber of humanitarian partners
CLUSTER OBJECTIVE 1

1Deliver life-saving management 
of acute malnutrition for the most 
vulnerable and at-risk U5 children 
and pregnant and lactating women. 
RELATES TO SO1

CLUSTER OBJECTIVE 2

2Prevent under-nutrition by 
increasing access to maternal, 
infant and young child nutrition 
interventions. 
RELATES TO SO1

CLUSTER OBJECTIVE 3

3Increase access to integrated 
nutrition, health, WASH, FSL and 
protection interventions. 
RELATES TO SO2

CLUSTER OBJECTIVE 4

4Enhance nutrition situation 
monitoring, analysis and 
utilization of nutrition 
information for early warning and 
decision making. 
RELATES TO SO3

BREAKDOWN OF PEOPLE IN NEED AND TARGETED BY STATUS, SEX AND AGE

PEOPLE IN NEED 
PEOPLE TARGETEDFINANCIAL 
REQUIREMENTSRefugeesSAMU5childrenMAMU5childrenMAMPLWMAMelderlySectortotalBY STATUS$180.0M$187.0M$7.0M0.3M0.3M0.2M0.3M0.6M0.6M0.3M0.5M0.004M0.002M1.8M1.3M
CONTACT

Hermann Ouedraogo, 
houedraogo@unicef.org

Koki Kyalo, 
SthSud.NutCls-CoCd@
concern.net



PROTECTION 

PEOPLE IN NEED

6.0M 

Strategy and key changes from 2018

The Protection Cluster and its Sub-Clusters 
on Child Protection, GBV, Mine Action, and 
Housing, Land and Property will continue to 
focus in 2019 on preventing, mitigating and 
responding to protection risks to the civilian 
population, including through life-saving 
response in hard-to-reach areas, risk mitigation, 
preparedness and resilience strengthening. 
While continuing to support conflict-affected 
and displaced people, the cluster will introduce 
new activities to support gender and age 
appropriate, safe and sustainable returns, 
relocations and local integration.43 These 
include work on HLP issues, particularly 
for women and child-headed households; 
community resilience building; local conflict 
mitigation and peaceful coexistence; youth-
related programming; demobilization and 
reintegration programming for children 
associated with armed forces and armed 
groups; and income-generating activities in 
collaboration with livelihood partners. 

Targeting and prioritization 

By the end of September 2018, the cluster 
had reached 34 per cent of the 3.7 million 
South Sudanese targeted.44 In 2019, protection 
sector actors aim to target 3.3 million South 
Sudanese and some 300,000 refugees. The 
clear majority of the target population are 
women and children. The cluster’s focus 
will remain on Unity, Upper Nile, Jonglei, 
Western and Northern Bahr el Ghazal, and 
the Equatorias. Within these areas, protection 
partners will prioritize locations with most 
severe needs, including through mobile teams, 
with three tiers of priority programming and 
activities defined by each sub-cluster: life-
saving activities;45 individual and community 
preparedness and resilience strengthening 
activities;46 and activities related to durable 
solutions.47 The cluster and sub-clusters will 
ensure that affected women, men, boys and 
girlsreceive psychosocial support and safe 
referral services. 

Integration 

The cluster will contribute to joint famine 
risk mitigation efforts through strengthened 
protection analysis and mainstreaming of 
gender and protection in collaboration with 
FSL, Nutrition, Health, Education, and WASH 
Clusters, particularly to support extremely 
vulnerable and at-risk categories such as older 
persons, people with disabilities, women and 
child headed households, and vulnerable 
children. The cluster will increasingly integrate 
targeted livelihood activities into GBV, child 
protection and durable solutions programming 
to enhance the protective environment. 
Protection partners will continue to support 
other sectors in mainstreaming protection, 
increasing gender and age disaggregation, 
conducting conflict and gender sensitive 
analysis, and implementing safe and 
appropriate referrals to services. 

Quality programming

The cluster will explore opportunities for 
cash-based interventions to gain efficiencies, 
with the aim of supporting durable solutions, 
vulnerable children and their families, and 
women’s empowerment. To inform and link 
with longer-term programming, humanitarian 
protection actors will strengthen communities 
and individuals’ preparedness and resilience. 
In line with the HCT Protection Strategy, the 
cluster will support the implementation of the 
principles of centrality of protection in guiding 
the overall humanitarian response and decision-
making at strategic and operational levels. 

PEOPLE TARGETED

3.6M 

SECTOR REQUIREMENTS (US$)

121M 

CLUSTER PARTNERS

3842567partnersINGOsLNGOsUNNumber of humanitarian partners
CLUSTER OBJECTIVE 1

1Provide lifesaving assistance to 
address priority protection needs 
for the most vulnerable women, 
men, girls and boys in hard-to-reach 
and priority areas. 
RELATES TO SO2

CLUSTER OBJECTIVE 2

2Prevent, mitigate and respond 
to protection risks through 
enhanced preparedness and 
resilience. 
RELATES TO SO2 & SO3 

CLUSTER OBJECTIVE 3

3Enable durable solutions for IDPs 
and other affected populations. 
RELATES TO SO2 & SO3

BREAKDOWN OF PEOPLE IN NEED AND TARGETED BY STATUS, SEX AND AGE

56%
56%
61 | 37 | 261| 37 | 2PEOPLE IN NEED 
PEOPLE TARGETEDFINANCIAL 
REQUIREMENTS0.3M2M1.3M0.3M1.3M0.6M6.0M3.6M1.4M2.5MRefugeesIDPsHost 
communitiesOtherwise 
affectedSector 
total% female% children, 
adult, older 
person*
BY STATUSBY SEX & AGE*Children (<18 years old), adult 
(18-59 years), elderly (>59 years)$99.8M$120.8M$21.0M
CONTACT

Kavita Belani, 
belani@unhcr.org

Julien Marneffe, 
julien.marneffe@nrc.no

48



PART II: water, sanitation and HYGIENE

PEOPLE IN NEED

6.0M 

WATER, SANITATION AND

HYGIENE 


Strategy and key changes from 2018

The cluster strategy focuses on timely and 
appropriate access to WASH services for IDPs 
and host communities and specific WASH 
interventions for GBV mitigation, famine risk 
mitigation, and WASH-related disease risk 
reduction for outbreak control. Compared 
to 2018, when the cluster emphasized a 
sectoral approach, the cluster strategy in 2019 
is characterized by significant attention to 
integration across sectors – as reflected in the 
WASH Cluster Objectives. Considering the 
anticipated levels of population movements, 
the cluster will continue to support displaced 
people and new returnees through the WASH 
rapid response mechanism. 

Targeting and prioritization 

By the end of September 2018, the cluster had 
reached 34 per cent of the 3.3 million South 
Sudanese targeted.49 In 2019, WASH sector 
actors aim to target 3 million South Sudanese 
and some 300,000 refugees. Geographically, the 
cluster will prioritize hygiene provision in areas 
identified through severity mapping as having 
high Global Acute Malnutrition rates, high risk 
of famine and high vulnerability to outbreaks, 
such as cholera or Ebola. Key geographic areas 
include Canal/Pigi, Awerial, Fangak, Pibor, 
Yirol East, Panyijiar, Ikotos, Kapoeta South 
Rubkona, Luakpiny/Nasir and Maiwut. WASH 
response focusing on GBV mitigation will be 
prioritized in counties experiencing conflict 
and displacement, informed by the WASH for 
GBV mitigation matrix.

Integration 

The cluster aims to integrate WASH services 
with several other sectors through 2019. It will 
alleviate nutrition crises through its WASH 
in Nutrition programming, for example by 
providing safe drinking water and hygiene 
kits at nutrition centers. Collaborating 
with the FSL Cluster, WASH partners will 
consider water supply for small livestock 
and promote appropriate hygiene practices. 
The cluster will enhance disease outbreak 
preparedness, response and risk reduction 
by integrating WASH support with health 
interventions, including through a tailored 
WASH minimum package of interventions. 
Integration with CCCM will service new and 
previously unreached displaced populations 
by improving needs-based and protection-
sensitive access to WASH services for IDPs 
and GBV mitigation. In schools, education 
and WASH partners will collaborate to provide 
safe water points and structural construction 
guidance for gender-appropriate toilets and 
handwashing facilities, and train girls and boys 
as ‘handwashing ambassadors’. 

Quality programming

The WASH Cluster will work with development 
partners to ensure complementarity between 
emergency and longer-term responses by 
deploying a minimum WASH package of 
interventions in institutions, such as nutritional 
and health facilities and schools, as well as 
in urban settings with a focus on mitigating 
outbreaks and preventing transmissions. The 
cluster will work with affected communities 
on programme design and use a checklist of 
minimum requirements on accountability 
to affected people. The response will ensure 
safe water access for all through gender and 
age appropriate measures and gendered risk 
assessments. 

PEOPLE TARGETED

3.3M 

SECTOR REQUIREMENTS (US$)

139M

CLUSTER PARTNERS

3822767partnersINGOsLNGOsUNNumber of humanitarian partners
CLUSTER OBJECTIVE 1

1Provide timely, equitable 
access to safe water, sanitation 
and hygiene for IDPs, host 
communities and returnees.

RELATES TO SO1

CLUSTER OBJECTIVE 2

2Mitigate WASH-related gender-
based violence.
RELATES TO SO2 

CLUSTER OBJECTIVE 3

3Integrate WASH in nutrition 
response through famine 
prevention minimum package.

RELATES TO SO2 & SO3

CLUSTER OBJECTIVE 3

4Integrate WASH in health 
response to control outbreaks at 
wider community level. 

RELATES TO SO1, SO2 & SO3

BREAKDOWN OF PEOPLE IN NEED AND TARGETED BY STATUS, SEX AND AGE

49%
49%
59 | 39 | 259| 39 | 2PEOPLE IN NEED 
PEOPLE TARGETEDFINANCIAL 
REQUIREMENTS0.3M0.3M2M3.8M-
-
6.0M3.4M2M1.1MRefugeesIDPsHost 
communitiesOtherwise 
affectedSector 
total% female% children, 
adult, older 
person*
BY STATUSBY SEX & AGE*Children (<18 years old), adult 
(18-59 years), elderly (>59 years)$129.6M$139.0M$9.4M
CONTACT

François Bellet, 
fbellet@unicef.org

Cristina Mena-Lander, 
cristina.lander@nrc.no

27



PART II: coordination AND COMMON SERVICES

COORDINATION

AND COMMON SERVICES 

ORGANIZATIONS TARGETED

183

REQUIREMENTS (US$)

17M

Strategy and key changes from 2018

In a context of limited resources, sustained 
high humanitarian needs and fluid population 
dynamics, strategic and operational 
coordination at national and sub-national 
levels remains essential for an efficient and 
effective response. The bi-weekly needs 
analysis and prioritization exercises in support 
of ICWG decision-making, combined with 
quarterly country-wide context analyses, will 
continue to play a key role in informing multi-
sector responses. The collection, analysis and 
dissemination of information on the evolving 
needs of affected populations remains critical 
to enable targeted provision of humanitarian 
response and adequate resource allocation in 
the locations where rigorous evidence-based 
analysis determines it is most needed. 

CCS actors will support data collection 
and analysis using agreed standard tools 
and methodologies, seeking to establish a 
better overall understanding of population 
numbers, locations and needs. This will 
include monitoring and tracking population 
movements as well as multi-sectoral needs 
analysis through joint and coordinated 
assessments. It is expected that returns will 
warrant greater attention in 2019, including 
monitoring flows and understanding 
intentions and pre-conditions for return. 
Biometric registration will also continue to 
provide evidence for targeted assistance and 
accountable service provision to people in 
need.

Coordination actors will prioritize the 
participation of affected women, men and 
children across the humanitarian response, 
with particular consideration of gender. 
Partners will strengthen and harmonize 
organizational approaches to community 
engagement, strengthen and establish feedback 
mechanisms where there are gaps, and build 
staff capacity to support communication with 
communities and enhance humanitarian 
organizations’ ability to respond to identified 
needs. 

Security risk analysis provided by CCS 
partners will remain critical through 2019, 
against the backdrop of the evolving political 
landscape and a history of violence against 
civilians, including aid workers. In 2019, a 
common approach to providing assistance 
in hard-to-reach areas will be promoted, 
informed by security risk assessments. 
This will include strengthening ‘deep field’ 
coordination mechanisms and facilitating 
operational hubs for sustained humanitarian 
presence. Advocacy with authorities at all 
levels for an enabling environment will also 
be prioritized with attention to issues affecting 
local responders who face the greatest 
pressure. 

Targeting and prioritization 

In 2018, CCS actors provided coordination 
and common services to 167 organizations. In 
2019, they aim to support 183 organizations, 
including 105 LNGOs, 67 INGOs and 
11 United Nations entities. CCS partners 
will promote equal opportunities for local 
responders to deliver assistance, including 
access to funding and participation in 
leadership of coordination structures. 

Integration 

CCS partners will play a key role in further 
integrating the humanitarian response across 
sectors for the greatest impact on people’s 
lives. This will entail robust information 
management and integrated needs analysis, 
including through the Needs Analysis 
Working Group and building on lessons 
learned from coordinating the 2017-2018 
famine risk mitigation minimum package of 
services by FSL, Health, Nutrition, Protection 
and WASH Clusters. Partners will also 
support linkages with development actors 
and resilience programming, where feasible, 
including through the UNCF.

Quality programming

CCS partners will promote quality 
programming through enhanced needs 
analysis and information sharing. 
Coordination partners will facilitate quarterly 
monitoring of the HRP strategic objectives 
at the end of the first and third quarter of 
the year, based on a monitoring plan agreed 
by the ICWG. Information and analysis on 
people’s needs will be disaggregated by sex and 
age to better understand the specific needs of 
women, men, girls and boys and ensure that 
humanitarian activities do not expose them to 
greater risks. CCS partners will prioritize and 
promote protection from sexual exploitation 
and abuse.

3137 
partnersLNGOsINGOsUNNumber of humanitarian partners
CLUSTER PARTNERS

CLUSTER OBJECTIVE 1

1 Ensure effective, principled and 
well-coordinated humanitarian 
action. 
RELATES TO SO1

CLUSTER OBJECTIVE 2

2 Ensure operations through 
enhanced safety and security of 
humanitarian personnel.
RELATES TO SO1 & SO2

CLUSTER OBJECTIVE 3

3 Improve programme quality 
through strengthened 
accountability to affected people.
RELATES TO SO2 & SO3

CONTACT

Beatrice Lakot, 
lakot@un.org 

Pius Ojara, 
coordinator@
southsudanngoforum.org 

28



LOGISTICS 

ORGANIZATIONS TARGETED

290

Strategy and key changes from 2018

The Logistics Cluster will drive a more 
efficient, integrated and cost-efficient logistics 
response on behalf of the humanitarian 
community. This will ensure that a robust 
supply chain delivery exists on behalf of all 
humanitarian partners to the most vulnerable 
people. The United Nations Humanitarian Air 
Service (UNHAS) will provide timely services 
to humanitarian agencies, in turn facilitating 
assistance and services to reduce acute needs 
among the most vulnerable women, men and 
children. The cluster’s maintenance of priority 
delivery infrastructures, such as airstrips, 
roads or ports, is key to enable access to 
remote areas, especially during wet season, 
improving capacity of the humanitarian 
community to meet the emerging needs 
in a timely manner. It will also increase 
preparedness activities from 2018, including 
mapping and contingency planning.

Targeting and prioritization 

In 2018, logistics actors supported more than 
the 270 organizations initially targeted. In 
2019, they aim to support 290 organizations 
across the UN, INGOs and LNGOs, including 
those outside the HRP. The logistics response 
will be guided by ICWG-set priorities. A 
focus will be placed on dry season planning 
and the use of Logistics Cluster coordinated 
road convoys to maximize pre-positioning at 
strategic locations using the cheapest transport 
modality available. Following on from the 
expansion of river use in 2018, the cluster with 
the support of World Food Programme (WFP) 
will make use of smaller boats to enable a 
more regular supply chain. International 
Organization for Migration will enable 
movement of supplies through its Common 
Transport Service (CTS) in key locations 
throughout the country. In areas inaccessible 
by road or river, the cluster will maintain 
a combination of a fixed-wing aircraft and 
helicopters to fit demands. UNHAS will 
provide air services to 55 destinations on its 
regular schedule. The cluster will identify and 
task infrastructure improvements to airstrips 
and roads. All cluster partners have staff based 
in strategic locations around the country, 
allowing sufficient access to hard-to-reach 
areas and enabling efficient use of aircraft to 
meet urgent demands.

Integration 

In 2019, the Logistics Cluster will continue to 
work closely with all sectors and participate in 
the ICWG and Operational Working Group 
where it has the lead on operational planning 
and logistics coordination, including for 
integrated multi-sectoral responses. Through 
engagement with relevant sector coordinators 
and partners, the Cluster will drive for 
efficiencies by looking at new or improved 
transport modalities, including the potential 
to expand river routes. UNHAS will work 
with the ICWG to coordinate multi-sector 
rapid response missions and special flights to 
reach people in need. IOM will continue to 
manage the CTS project and support ‘Beyond’ 
responses50 where needed. The United 
Nations Office for Project Services, based on 
recommendations by the Logistics Cluster, 
will be focused on improving airstrips in 
isolated areas and, through its work with key 
stakeholders such as UNMISS and WFP, will 
work to keep supply roads open and passable 
throughout the year. 

Quality programming

The cluster will continue to drive the 
humanitarian community’s efforts to identify 
efficiencies and make savings, while ensuring 
a dignified and evidence-based response 
to people’s most severe needs. Through its 
capacity development initiatives, the Logistics 
Cluster will strengthen its link with the wider 
humanitarian community, including local 
partners who will remain active in areas 
eventually vacated by emergency actors.

REQUIREMENTS (US$)

87M

CLUSTER PARTNERS

3partnersUNNumber of humanitarian partners
CLUSTER OBJECTIVE 1

1 Provide logistics coordination, 
support and technical advisory 
services to the humanitarian 
community. 
RELATES TO SO1

CLUSTER OBJECTIVE 2

2 Enhance access to beneficiaries 
and project implementation 
sites through safe, effective and 
efficient passenger air service. 
RELATES TO SO1

CLUSTER OBJECTIVE 3

3Provide infrastructure works 
to ensure the humanitarian 
community is able to access 
affected populations. 
RELATES TO SO1

CONTACT

Fiona Lithgow, 
fiona.lithgow@wfp.org



REFUGEE RESPONSE PLAN

PEOPLE IN NEED

338K

PEOPLE TARGETED

338K

Strategy and key changes from 2018

In 2019, the refugee response strategy focuses 
on five key areas: ensuring access to territory, 
reception, registration, status determination 
and documentation with Government; 
maintaining the humanitarian and civilian 
character of asylum; promoting peaceful co-
existence with host communities; addressing 
needs of children with a focus on access to 
education, women at risk, GBV survivors and 
persons with specific needs; and promoting 
access to justice. Building on from 2018 and 
in line with Government policy, support 
for internal relocation of refugees based on 
serious protection grounds will continue.51 

Targeting and prioritization 

By the end of September 2018, the refugee 
response had reached 100 per cent of the 
nearly 300,000 refugees residing and targeted 
in South Sudan. In 2019, the response will aim 
to support some 338,000 refugee women, men 
and children. Over 99 per cent of the refugees 
live in camps and settlements in 21 locations 
across Central Equatoria, Jonglei, Unity, Upper 
Nile and Western Equatoria, while 1 per cent 
lives in urban locations, primarily Juba. Of 
the total refugee population supported, 82 
per cent are women and children. Lifesaving 
activities and core protection interventions, 
including for registration, documentation and 
GBV, will be prioritized with the resources 
available, besides shelter improvement and 
education activities. The requirements of 
persons of specific needs will be mainstreamed 
throughout the response. 

Integration 

The refugee response is highly integrated to 
support both refugees and host communities 
with a diverse set of humanitarian support 
across food and livelihoods, nutrition, 
health, shelter, WASH and education sectors. 
Host communities and refugees share basic 
services such as education, water and health, 
and integrated support to host communities 
remains a key priority in 2019. Promotion of 
peaceful coexistence will be integrated into 
various sectorial interventions.

Quality programming

Partners will continue to improve the quality 
of services provided to refugees to ensure 
compliance with international standards, 
including on shelter, health, food, education 
and WASH. The protection environment 
will be enhanced through the engagement 
of refugee and host communities with joint 
activities, such as peace talks, agricultural 
fairs, sports activities and cultural events. The 
refugee response will progressively expand and 
systematize the use of CTP to provide greater 
dignity of choice to refugees and improve 
efficiency and effectiveness in the realization 
of protection and solutions. The response 
will adopt a sustainable and environmentally 
sensitive approach and promote self-
reliance and resilience of refugees and host 
communities through livelihood programmes.

REQUIREMENTS (US$)

121M

151218 
partnersLNGOsINGOsUNNumber of humanitarian partners
PARTNERS

OBJECTIVE 1

1 Provide refugees and asylum-
seekers and the most vulnerable 
people among them with 
adequate access to safety, life-saving 
assistance and basic services.
RELATES TO SO1

OBJECTIVE 2

2 Ensure that refugees and asylum-
seekers have access to effective 
protection. 
RELATES TO SO2

OBJECTIVE 3

3 Enhance and expand extremely 
vulnerable refugees’ and host 
communities’ resilience and 
coping capacities.
RELATES TO SO3

BREAKDOWN OF PEOPLE IN NEED AND TARGETED BY STATUS, SEX AND AGE

17K2K146K162K11K338K53%
-
62 | 36 | 2- | - | -
CENTRAL EQUATORIAWESTERN EQUATORIATOTALTOTALJONGLEIUNITYUPPER NILE0-410.0 
13.013.08.08.021.01.01.015.010.020.026.016.036.02.0100.047.053.060+
5-1112-1718-59RefugeesAge% Female% Male% Total% female% children, 
adult, Older 
person*
BY STATEBY AGE & SEXSUMMARY*Children (<18 years old), adult 
(18-59 years), elderly (>59 years)
CONTACT

Shankar Chauhan, 
chauhan@unhcr.org

Eujin Byun, 
byun@unhcr.org



ABYEI RESPONSE PLAN

PEOPLE IN NEED

128K

52

PEOPLE TARGETED

128K

Summary of needs

Some 182,000 people require humanitarian 
assistance in the disputed Abyei Area 
due to the presence of armed elements, 
continued inter-communal violence, 
presence of explosive remnants of war, 
population movement, natural disaster, 
poor infrastructure and the absence of 
public institutions and government services. 
This includes some 87,000 Ngok Dinka 
communities and returnees; some 15,000 
Ngok Dinka displaced within Abyei; some 
9,000 people from Unity and Warrap in Abyei; 
some 34,000 Misseriya in north of Abyei; and 
some 37,000 Misseriya seasonal migrants who 
had entered the area in October 2018 and will 
migrate back in June and July 2019.

Response strategy and targeting

Humanitarian partners in Abyei will work 
to increase the resilience of affected agro-
pastoralist and nomadic communities 
through tailored approaches based on 
people’s specific needs and vulnerabilities. 
The response will target the entire 182,000 
people in need in the Abyei Area. The main 
objective of humanitarian programming 
in the Abyei Area is to save lives through 
integrated multi-sectoral programmes in 
an approach of decreasing dependency on 
humanitarian assistance among displaced 
people, returnees, seasonal migrants and 
host communities through transitional/
recovery activities and increase resilience 
among communities ensuring sustainability 
through capacity building activates. The multi-
sectoral approach includes but is not limited 
to protection, health, nutrition, food security 
and livelihoods, WASH, education and shelter 
activities, ensuring a strong community-based 
and peacebuilding approach.

481022partnersINGOsLNGOsUNNumber of humanitarian partners
PARTNERS

OBJECTIVE 1

1Save lives by providing timely 
and integrated multi-sector 
assistance and services to the 
most vulnerable populations. 

OBJECTIVE 2

2Decrease dependency on 
humanitarian assistance 
among displaced people, 
returnees, seasonal migrants and host 
communities through transitional and 
recovery activities. 

KEY ACTIVITIES

1 Maintain humanitarian life-
saving services and increase 
their sustainability by adopting 
participatory approaches and building 
community-based management 
capacity, e.g. water management 
committees, youth and women unions 
and peace clubs. 

2 Contribute to the reduction in 
morbidity and mortality with 
increased access to quality 
health care interventions through 
primary health care interventions 
and community case management 
approaches.

3 Reduce the risk of malnutrition 
in children under age 5 and 
pregnant and lactating women 
through treatment of severe and 
moderate acute malnutrition. 

4 Improve access to safe drinking 
water and adequate hygiene 
and sanitation with particular 
focus on areas of displacement, return 
and host communities in the Abyei 
Area.

5 Provide access to primary 
education and training, 
including support to all 
students and teachers, establishment 
of learning spaces, basic rehabilitation 
of schools, school meals, and incentives 
to increase enrolment and retention of 
girls in school.

6 Establish veterinary services 
and revitalize the community-
based animal health workers 
network for pastoralist nomadic 
populations by adopting a “follow on 
approach” throughout migration, and 
increase access to appropriate animal 
drugs and vaccines at village level for 
sedentary populations.

7 Strengthen protection by 
working with all stakeholders, 
including local institutions 
and United Nations Interim Security 
Force for Abyei/United Nations Police, 
to reduce protection risks, sexual and 
gender-based violence and implement 
comprehensive protection responses 
with a focus on people with specific 
vulnerabilities. Provide women and 
child protection services, reduce risk of 
death and injury from landmines and 
explosive remnants of war through 
mine risk education, and engage 
with all actors to advocate for a better 
protective environment for civilians.

8 Improve communities’ 
resilience through livelihoods 
and food security activities, 
developing community assets, 
and improving technical expertise, 
for example agricultural, animal 
husbandry and fishery practices and 
community-based natural resource 
management.

9 Improve access to 
humanitarian corridors 
through advocacy with 
authorities at national and sub-national 
levels, and improve monitoring 
impediments and civil-military 
coordination.

10 Maintain readiness, 
and update the Abyei 
inter-agency contingency 
plan and sector specific emergency 
preparedness plans to respond to 
emergencies quickly by securing 
support from Governments of Sudan 
and South Sudan, according to 
available supply routes, for a minimum 
amount of pre-positioned stock in 
Abyei, including emergency shelter 
and non-food item kits.

11Monitor, track and profile 
displacement and return in 
Abyei and identify the most 
populations for assistance across all 
humanitarian sectors.

12Strengthen conflict 
resolution and peace 
building skills of youth 
and women in Abyei to contribute to 
decisions and peaceful coexistence of 
their communities.

OBJECTIVE 3

3Increase resilience among 
communities ensuring 
sustainability through capacity 
building activities.

CONTACT

Gul Mohammad Fazli, 
fazli2@un.org 



Photo: United Nations/Albert González Farran





Strategic Objectives, Indicators and Targets

Participating Organizations and Funding Requirements

End Notes

Guide to Giving



STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES, INDICATORS AND TARGETS

Strategic Objective 1: Save lives by providing timely and integrated multi-sector assistance and services 
to reduce acute needs among the most vulnerable women, men, girls and boys

INDICATOR

IN NEED

BASELINE

TARGET

MONITORED BY

Number of people receiving food assistance 

5,500,000

TBD

3,730,000

FSL Cluster

Number of households receiving agricultural inputs/vegetable and fishing kits

TBD

833,000

FSL Cluster

Number of children admitted for SAM treatment discharged with WASH/
hygiene kit from functional Outpatient Therapeutic Programme/Stabilization 
Centre

225,719

TBD

112,860

WASH and 
Nutrition Clusters

Number of outpatient department consultations

2,272,700

TBD

1,272,711

Health Cluster

Number of people supported through the provision of emergency shelter

109,457

TBD

59,461

ES/NFI Cluster

Number of children aged 6-59 months with SAM admitted for treatment

259,732 
(132,463 M 
127,268 F)

TBD

220,680 
(112,547 M 
108,133 F)

Nutrition Cluster

Percentage of people reached in hard to reach areas

TBD

TBD

Clusters and OCHA

Percentage of people reached in areas of most severe need

TBD

TBD

Clusters and OCHA

Number of people reached by rapid response teams

TBD

TBD

Clusters and OCHA

Number of counties implementing the minimum package of interventions for 
famine risk mitigation

TBD

TBD

Clusters and OCHA





Strategic Objective 2: Protect vulnerable women, men, girls and boys through provision of specialized 
and integrated services

INDICATOR

IN NEED

BASELINE

TARGET

MONITORED BY

Number of SGBV survivors receiving clinical management of rape services 

81,167

TBD

1,500

Protection Cluster

Number of women and girls with safe water access in secure location agreed 
after a GBV risk analysis through focus group discussions with women and 
girls, conducted by female staff

3,681,953

TBD

1,813,000

WASH and 
Protection Clusters

Number of teachers, community members (School Management Committee/
Parent Teacher Assosiation) and education authorities receiving and trained on 
psycho-social support

42,902

TBD

10,000

Education Cluster

Number of women, men, girls and boys benefiting from comprehensive GBV 
case management services

TBD

30,000

Protection Cluster

Number of boys and girls at high protection risk receiving critical life-saving 
child protection services

TBD

30,000

Protection Cluster





Strategic Objective 3: Support at-risk communities to promote and sustain their resilience to acute 
shocks and chronic stresses 

INDICATOR

IN NEED

BASELINE

TARGET

MONITORED BY

Number of people assisted through cash transfer programming 

TBD

1,600,000

Clusters and Cash 
Working Group

Number of people benefiting from targeted and specialized assistance on HLP 
issues supporting durable solutions

TBD

100,000

Protection Cluster

Number of animals treated and vaccinated

TBD

8,000,000

FSL Cluster

Number of community education committee members and local education 
officials trained in school management, monitoring and record keeping

TBD

833,000

Education Cluster

Percentage of training participants that illustrate an improved level of 
knowledge following training on camp management and humanitarian 
response

TBD

80

CCCM Cluster





All cluster objectives and indicators: https://bit.ly/2FOXlr8



PARTICIPATING ORGANIZATIONS AND FUNDING REQUIREMENTS

Organizations

Requirements (US$)

ACT Alliance / DanChurchAid (ACT/DCA)

 5,681,066 

ACT Alliance / Finn Church Aid (ACT/FCA)

 585,000 

ACT Alliance / Lutheran World Federation (ACT/
LWF)

 713,662 

ACT Alliance / Norwegian Church Aid (ACT/NCA)

 972,500 

ACT Alliance / United Methodist Committee on 
Relief (ACT/UMCOR)

 500,000 

Action Africa Help-International (AAHI)

 668,128 

Action Against Hunger (AAH)

 7,150,000 

 Action for Development (AFOD) 

 1,782,750 

 Actions for Rapid Development - Africa (ARD - 
Africa) 

 92,820 

 Active Youth Agency (AYA) 

 480,000 

Advance Africa Initiative (ADAFIN)

 100,000 

Africa Development Aid (ADA)

 490,000 

African Humanitarian Corps (AHC)

 290,000 

African Relief and Development Foundation 
(ARDF) 

 230,000 

Afro-Canadian Evangelical Mission (ACEM) 

 919,000 

Agency for Technical Cooperation and 
Development (ACTED)

 6,092,960 

Aid Support Community Organization (ASCO)

 1,150,000 

American Refugee Committee (ARC) 

 3,166,202 

Andre Foods South Sudan (AFSS) 

 380,000 

Apt Succor Organization (ASO)

 70,000 

Assistance Mission Africa (AMA)

 200,000 

Association of Christian Resource Organizations 
Serving Sudan (ACROSS)

 250,000 

Associazione Volontari per il Servizio 
Internazionale (AVSI)

 2,689,420 

Basic Education Development Network (BEDN)

 130,000 

Care for Children and Old Age in South Sudan 
(CCOSS)

 1,146,300 

CARE International (CARE)

 6,840,669 

Caritas Switzerland

 465,732 

Catholic Medical Missons Board (CMMB)

 750,334 

Catholic Organisation for Relief and Development 
Aid (CORDAID)

 1,400,335 

Catholic Relief Services (CRS)

 8,665,884 

Centre for Emergency and Development Support 
(CEDS)

 300,000 

Organizations

Requirements (US$)

Charity Mission Corps (CMC)

 250,000 

Children Aid South Sudan (CASS)

 1,011,859 

Children Charity Organization (CCO)

 100,000 

Christian Mission Aid (CMA)

 1,700,000 

Christian Mission for Development (CMD)

 4,868,877 

Christian Recovery and Development Agency 
(CRADA)

 2,271,004 

Coalition for Humanity South Sudan (CH)

 1,460,335 

Collegio Universitario Aspirante e Medici 
Missionari (CUAMM)

 3,145,026 

Community Action Organization (CAO)

 800,000 

Community Agriculture and Skills Initiative (CASI)

 180,000 

Community Aid for Fisheries and Agriculture 
Development (CAFAD)

 800,000 

Community Aid for Relief and Development 
(CARD)

 600,000 

Community Development Support Services (CDSS)

 300,000 

Community Health and Development 
Organization (CHADO)

 1,190,335 

Community In Need Aid (CINA)

 1,300,000 

Community Initiative for Development 
Organization (CIDO)

 2,003,835 

Community Initiative for Sustainable 
Development Agency (CISDA)

 300,000 

Community Organization for Emergency and 
Rehabilitation (COER)

 450,000 

Concern Worldwide (CW)

 7,341,653 

Confident Children out of Conflict (CCOC)

 100,000 

Crisis Resilience Initiative (CRI)

 100,000 

Danish Refugee Council (DRC)

 13,290,645 

Deutsche Welthungerhilfe e.V. German Agro 
Action (DWHH)

 3,800,000 

Dorcas Aid International (DAI)

 2,740,000 

Equatoria Rehabilitation and Development 
Association (ERADA)

 150,000 

Food & Agriculture Organization of the United 
Nations (FAO)

 70,000,000 

Food Agriculture and Disaster Management 
(FADM)

 200,000 

Food for the Hungry (FH)

 3,000,000 

Global Relief and Development Organization 
(GRADO)

 240,000 







Organizations

Requirements (US$)

GOAL

 5,551,644 

Grassroot Empowerment and Development 
Organization (GREDO)

 350,000 

Grassroots Relief and Development Agency 
(GREDA)

 650,000 

Great Commission Operation Mercy (GCOM)

 100,000 

Green Belt Initiative (GBI)

 945,000 

Handicap International / Humanity & Inclusion 
(HI)

 4,771,575 

Health Action Aid (HAA)

 610,000 

Healthcare Foundation Organization (HFO)

 600,335 

HealthLink South Sudan (HLSS)

 4,359,604 

Help - Hilfe zur Selbsthilfe e.V. (HELP e.V.)

 2,495,600 

Help a Child International (HaC)

 100,000 

Help Restore Youth South Sudan (HeRY)

 300,000 

Hold the Child Organisation (HCO)

 1,407,334 

Hope for Children and Women Foundation 
(HCAWFO)

 950,335 

Hope Restoration South Sudan (HRSS)

 649,989 

Humane Aid for Community Organization (HACO)

 650,000 

Humanitarian Aid for Change and Transformation 
(HACT)

 750,000 

Humanitarian Aid for Development (HAD)

 300,000 

Humanitarian and Development Consortium 
(HDC)

 300,000 

Humanity Empowerment and Leadership 
Promotion Organization (HELPO)

 300,000 

Impact Health Organization (IHO)

 2,100,335 

Initiative for Peace Communication Association 
(IPCA)

 100,000 

International Aid Services (IAS)

 400,000 

International Medical Corps (IMC)

 5,664,935 

International Organization for Migration (IOM)

 58,386,102 

International Rescue Committee (IRC)

 6,213,119 

Internews (IN)

 2,251,341 

INTERSOS Humanitarian Aid Organization 
(INTERSOS)

 4,880,000 

Islamic Relief Worldwide (IRW)

 4,659,589 

IsraAID

 1,240,000 

Jesuit Refugee Service (JRS)

 845,063 

Johanniter Unfallhilfe e.V. (JUH)

 250,000 

John Dau Foundation (JDF)

 1,050,335 

Organizations

Requirements (US$)

Joint Aid Management International (JAM 
International)

 4,000,000 

Lacha Community and Economic Development 
(LCED)

 1,040,000 

LiveWell South Sudan (LiveWell)

 2,751,171 

MAGNA Medical and Nutrition Global Aid 
(MAGNA)

 475,000 

MEDAIR

 12,328,152 

Medicair - South Sudan (Medicair)

 746,203 

Medical and Nutrition Global Aid (MAGNA)

 600,335 

Medicos del Mundo Spain (MDM)

 1,326,614 

Mercy Corps

 2,949,424 

Mines Advisory Group (MAG)

 1,293,467 

Mobile Humanitarian Agency (MHA)

 294,128 

Mobile Theatre Team (MTT)

 349,999 

Mother and Children Development Aid (MaCDA)

 596,321 

Nile Hope

 10,746,129 

Nile Sustainable Development Organization 
(NSDO)

 450,000 

Nonviolent Peaceforce (NPP)

 5,014,454 

Norwegian People's Aid (NPA)

 500,000 

Norwegian Refugee Council (NRC)

 10,237,684 

Nurture South Sudan (NuSS)

 281,800 

Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs 
(OCHA)

 8,915,000 

Organization for Peace, Relief and Development 
(OPRD)

 432,000 

Organization for Peoples' Empowerment and 
Needs (OPEN)

 644,420 

OXFAM GB

 8,500,000 

Peace Corps Organization (PCO)

 942,250 

Peace Winds Japan (PWJ)

 1,400,000 

Pilgrims of Hope (POH)

 180,000 

Plan International (Plan)

 3,248,784 

Polish Humanitarian Action (PAH)

 8,409,900 

Première Urgence Internationale (PUI)

 2,846,715 

REACH Initiative (REACH)

 2,300,000 

Real Medicine Foundation (RMF)

 600,000 

Relief Corps Organization (RCO)

 300,000 

Relief International (RI)

 8,848,439 

Rural Community Action for Peace and 
Development (RUCAPD)

 800,000 







Organizations

Requirements (US$)

Rural Health Services (RHS)

 800,335 

Rural Water and Sanitation Support Agency 
(RUWASSA)

 957,000 

Rural Women for Development South Sudan 
(RWDSS)

 200,000 

Samaritan's Purse

 1900000 

Save Lives Initiative South Sudan (SLI - SS)

 510,000 

Save the Children (SC)

 10,574,501 

Smile Again Africa Development Organization 
(SAADO)

 1,691,000 

Solidarités International (SI)

 3,590,000 

South Sudan Development Agency (SSUDA)

 740,000 

South Sudan Grassroot Initiative for Development 
(SSGID)

 300,000 

South Sudan Health Association (SSUHA)

 163,580 

South Sudan Law Society (SSLS)

 1,000,000 

South Sudan Older People's Organization (SSOPO)

 100,000 

Stichting ZOA (SZOA)

 2,490,000 

Stop Poverty Communal Initiative (SPOCI)

 550,000 

Stretching Hands to Africa (SHAO)

 250,000 

Sudan Evangelical Mission (SEM)

 100,000 

Sudan Medical Care (SMC)

 1,767,032 

Support for Peace and Education Development 
Program (SPEDP)

 4,375,609 

Support the Empowerment of Women and their 
Rights for Development (STEWARDWOMEN)

 350,000 

Sustainable Children Aid (SCA)

 100,000 

TARGET Association (TARGET)

 137,000 

TEARFUND

 7,557,500 

Terre des Hommes - Lausanne (TdH - L)

 1,164,314 

The Health Support Organization (THESO)

 2,234,323 

The Mentor Initiative (Mentor)

 1,618,409 

The Rescue Initiative South Sudan (TRI-SS)

 984,129 

The Rescue Mission (TERM)

 390,000 

Titi Foundation (TF)

 745,022 

Organizations

Requirements (US$)

Touch Africa Development Organization (TADO)

 1,172,335 

Trust Action Youth Association (TAYA)

 280,000 

Trust Organization for Community Aid Agency 
(TOCAA)

 600,335 

United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF)

 163,134,641 

United Nations Department of Safety and Security 
(UNDSS)

 345,000 

United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees 
(UNHCR)

 143,937,963 

United Nations Mine Action Service (UNMAS)

 3,575,002 

United Nations Office for Project Services (UNOPS )

 4,000,000 

United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA)

 18,306,024 

United Networks for Health (UNH)

 600,335 

Universal Intervention and Development 
Organization (UNIDO)

 6,095,760 

Universal Network for Child Defence Rights 
(UNCDR)

 100,000 

Universal Network for Knowledge and 
Empowerment Agency (UNKEA)

 6,234,961 

Vétérinaires sans Frontières - VSF (Germany)

 350,000 

Vétérinaires sans Frontières - VSF (Switzerland)

 1,250,000 

Volunteer Organization for the International 
Co-operation la Nostra Famiglia (OVCI la Notra 
Famiglia)

 703,403 

War Child Canada (WCC)

 1,488,125 

War Child Holland (WCH)

 800,000 

Widows and Orphans Charitable Organization 
(WOCO)

 100,000 

Women Advancement Organization (WAO)

 100,000 

Women Aid Vision (WAV)

 450,000 

World Food Programme (WFP)

 659,773,327 

World Health Organization (WHO)

 23,422,559 

World Relief

 3,746,402 

World Vision South Sudan (WV South Sudan)

 22,938,463 

GRAND TOTAL

1,507,421,344 





For the full list of projects in the 2019 HRP, please see:

https://fts.unocha.org/appeals/713/projects



END NOTES

1 Throughout the document, the term children refers to girls 
and boys between 3 and 18 years of age, unless otherwise 
specified.

2 The number of South Sudanese refugees in the region as of 
October 2018 was revised by UNHCR from 2.47 million 
to 2.18 million, based on a recent verification exercise 
conducted in Uganda. 

3 OHCHR and UNMISS, Indiscriminate Attacks Against 
Civilians in Southern Unity, April-May 2018; OHCHR 
and UNMISS, Violations and Abuses Against Civilians in 
Gbudue and Tambura States (Western Equatoria), April-
August 2018.

4 South Sudan Health Policy Document.

5 Nutrition Cluster, Rapid coverage and gap analysis of 
WASH services in nutrition sites, June 2018.

6 National Bureau of Statistics, Ministry of Health, 2012. 
Cited in WHO, Global Health Observatory data repository, 
Births attended by skilled health personnel. 

7 WHO, UNICEF, UNFPA, World Bank Group and the 
United Nations Population Division, Trends in Maternal 
Mortality 1995-2015, November 2015.

8 UNICEF, 3 in 4 children born in South Sudan since 
independence have known nothing but war, July 2018. 

9 UNESCO et al, Global Initiative on Out of School 
Children, South Sudan Country Study, May 2018.

10 REACH, “Now the Forest is Blocked”: Shocks and Access 
to Food, March 2018. 

11 UNEP and South Sudan Ministry of Environment, South 
Sudan First State of Environment and Outlook Report, 
2018.

12 Women do nearly 98 per cent of agricultural work in 
South Sudan. While not owning the land or necessarily 
benefiting from the income produced, women play a 
significant role in agricultural labour and food security.

13 FAO, 2018.

14 World Bank, Global Poverty Working Group, 2016. 
Poverty line defined as $1.99 per day.

15 Integrated Food Security Phase Classification, Analysis 
Report on South Sudan: September 2018 and Projections 
for October-December 2018 and January-March 2019.

16 From 20,000 in January-March 2018 to 36,000 in January-
March 2019.

17 In the South Sudan Humanitarian Access Severity 
Overview (OCHA, September 2018), ‘high access 
constraint’ is defined as follows: Significant access 
constraints present. Access is extremely difficult or 
impossible. Armed groups, checkpoints, bureaucratic or 
other access impediments are present and actively restrict 
humanitarian activities. Operations in these areas are 
often severely restricted or impossible. Even with adequate 
resources, partners would be unable to reach more than a 
minority of targeted people in need.

18 The concept of the New Way of Working, which emerged 
from the Secretary-General’s 2016 report for the World 
Humanitarian Summit, defines collective outcomes as 
“concrete and measurable results that humanitarian, 
development and other relevant actors want to achieve 
jointly over a period of 3-5 years to reduce people’s needs, 
risks and vulnerabilities and increase their resilience. As 
such, collective outcomes neither refer purely to life-
saving humanitarian action nor longer-term development 
outcomes. Instead, the focus is on collective outcomes at 
the point where humanitarian and development action 
meet. […] Based on joint situational analysis, these 
outcomes act as the target which all relevant actors work 
towards [...] based on their comparative advantages”. 
OCHA, 2018, Collective Outcomes: Operationalizing the 
New Way of Working.

19 Gender inequality runs risk of getting further entrenched 
post-conflict, as men scramble for power or reclaim 
territory.

20 Integrated Food Security Phase Classification, Analysis 
Report on South Sudan: September 2018 and Projections 
for October-December 2018 and January-March 2019.

21 From 20,000 in January-March 2018 to 36,000 in January-
March 2019.

22 UNHCR, External Update on South Sudan Spontaneous 
Refugee Returnees, October 2018.

23 Ibid.

24 DTM Malakal Combined Assessment, February 2018.

25 UNICEF, National Budget Brief for Republic of South 
Sudan, Fiscal Year 2017/18.

26 Building peace and strengthening governance; 
Improving food security and recovering local economies; 
Strengthening social services; and Empowering women 
and youth.

27 United Nations Security Council resolution 2406 (2018). 

28 IASC Guidance on Centrality of Protection and 
Framework for Durable Solutions; HCT Guidance on 
Solutions-Based Approach to Displaced Populations 
in South Sudan, endorsed in October 2017 and its 
Operational Guidance Note on Returns and Relocations in 
South Sudan from early 2018.

29 There are four components to the system-wide approach: 
1) advance state responsibility to protect the civilian 
population, 2) foster a positive protection environment, 
3) assist survivors of violations and abuses, and 4) provide 
physical protection.

30 The other two pillars of the mandate are monitoring 
and investigating human rights and supporting the 
implementation of the agreement and the peace process.

31 See the 2019 HNO for further detail on access constraints 
and the 2019 HRP’s chapter on Humanitarian Access for 
information on operational responses to improve access. 



32 Humanitarian Exchange, Number 68, January 2017, Cash 
in conflict: cash programming in South Sudan.

33 In 2019, the CWG plans to also lay the foundation for 
the following longer-term objectives: 1) Increase the 
routine use of cash alongside other tools, including 
in-kind assistance, service delivery (such as health and 
nutrition) and vouchers; 2) Explore new delivery models 
which can be scaled up while identifying best practices 
and mitigating risks in each context; 3) Build an evidence 
base to assess the costs, benefits, impacts and risks of cash, 
including on protection, relative to in-kind assistance, 
service delivery interventions and vouchers; 4) Collaborate, 
share information and develop standards and guidelines 
for cash programming; and 5) Ensure that coordination, 
delivery and monitoring and evaluation mechanisms are 
systematically put in place for CTP. 

34 This has since advanced into a Joint Programming Initiative 
for Resilience and Development to build resilience in 
crisis-prone communities suffering from food insecurity, 
malnutrition, livelihood disruptions,unemployment and 
depletion of coping mechanisms.

35 For further detail, see Response strategy: Response 
enablers: Support increased involvement of local 
responders.

36 For definitions, see OCHA, South Sudan Humanitarian 
Access Severity Overview, September 2018.

37 Per the latest Humanitarian Dashboard released in 
November 2018, which contains people reached as of 30 
September.

38 Per the latest Humanitarian Dashboard released in 
November 2018, which contains people reached as of 30 
September.

39 While there are no universally accepted definitions of 
adolescence and youth, the United Nations understands 
adolescents to include persons aged 10-19 years and youth 
as those between 15- 24 years for statistical purposes 
without prejudice to other definitions by Member States. 
Report of the Advisory Committee for the International 
Youth Year (A/36/215 annex.

40 Per the latest Humanitarian Dashboard released in 
November 2018, which contains people reached as of 30 
September.

41 Per the latest Humanitarian Dashboard released in 
November 2018, which contains people reached as of 30 
September.

42 Per the latest Humanitarian Dashboard released in 
November 2018, which contains people reached as of 30 
September.

43 New protection needs are anticipated in 2019, with the 
prospects of stability increasing the potential number of 
people, including a significant proportion of women or 
child-headed households, searching for durable solutions 
to their displacement.

44 Per the latest Humanitarian Dashboard released in 
November 2018, which contains people reached as of 30 
September. The number of direct beneficiaries reached is 
limited in representation of the impact of the Protection 
Cluster activities because partners tend to report at the end 
of an intervention. Priority interventions such as family 
tracing and reunification and provision of life-saving 
assistance in hard-to-reach conflict affected areas are 
higher cost per beneficiary, and many priority protection 
interventions have few or no direct beneficiaries, including 
protection assessments, clearance of explosive hazards and 
establishing community-based protection mechanisms. 

45 Such as case management activities for GBV survivors, 
CAAFAGA, and unaccompanied and separated children.

46 With a focus on livelihood activities as a protection 
mechanism, community-based and youth-targeted 
programming.

47 With a focus on housing, land and property, and resilience

48 This population includes conflict-affected persons and 
IDPs pursing durable solutions through return, relocation 
and local integration.

49 Per the latest Humanitarian Dashboard released in 
November 2018, which contains people reached as of 30 
September.

50 Humanitarian partners and UNMISS have location-
specific strategies, for example around Bentiu, to increase 
protection and assistance in local communities.

51 In 2018, South Sudan President Salva Kiir signed the 
accession instrument to the 1951 Convention on the Status 
of Refugees and its 1967 Protocol after it was ratified by the 
Transitional National Legislative Assembly. This is seen as 
a reiteration of the Government’s commitment to assuming 
more responsibility to protect refugees and asylum-seekers 
in the country.

52 The final status of Abyei region has not yet been 
determined. Humanitarian partners operate in the area 
from both Sudan and South Sudan. Costs for operations 
in the region are included under the relevant partners’ 
projects in the 2018 HRP for South Sudan and the multi-
year HRP for Sudan. The funding requirement represents 
the total aggregated requirements for the response in Abyei 
but will not be tracked separately in the Financial Tracking 
System. Funding levels will instead be tracked against 
relevant projects in the South Sudan and Sudan HRPs.



GUIDE TO GIVING

HRP

DONATING 
THROUGH 
SOUTH SUDAN 
HUMANITARIAN FUND

The South Sudan Humanitarian 
Fund is a country-based pooled 
fund (CBPF). CBPFs are multi-
donor humanitarian financing 
instruments established by the 
Emergency Relief Coordinator 
(ERC) and managed by OCHA 
at the country level under the 
leadership of the Humanitarian 
Coordinator (HC). Find out 
more about the South Sudan 
Humanitarian Fund by visiting 
the website: http://www.unocha.
org/country/south-sudan/
humanitarian-fund-overview 

For information on how to make 
a contribution, please contact:

ochasshf@un.org

CONTRIBUTING 
TO THE 
HUMANITARIAN 
RESPONSE PLAN

To see the country’s 
humanitarian needs overview, 
humanitarian response plan 
and monitoring reports, and 
donate directly to organizations 
participating to the plan, please 
visit:

www.humanitarian
response.info/en/
operations/south-
sudan

DONATING 
THROUGH 
THE CENTRAL 
EMERGENCY RESPONSE FUND 
(CERF)

CERF provides rapid initial 
funding for life-saving actions 
at the onset of emergencies and 
for poorly funded, essential 
humanitarian operations in 
protracted crises. The OCHA-
managed CERF receives 
contributions from various 
donors – mainly governments, 
but also private companies, 
foundations, charities and 
individuals – which are 
combined into a single fund. 
This is used for crises anywhere 
in the world. Find out more 
about the CERF and how to 
donate by visiting the CERF 
website: 

www.unocha.org/
cerf/our-donors/
how-donate

IN-KIND RELIEF AID

The United Nations urges donors to make cash rather than in-kind donations, for maximum speed and 
flexibility, and to ensure the aid materials that are most needed are the ones delivered. If you can make only 
in-kind contributions in response to disasters and emergencies, please contact:

logik@un.org

REGISTERING AND RECOGNIZING YOUR CONTRIBUTIONS

OCHA manages the Financial Tracking Service (FTS), which records all reported humanitarian contributions 
(cash, in-kind, multilateral and bilateral) to emergencies. Its purpose is to give credit and visibility 
to donors for their generosity and to show the total amount of funding and expose gaps in humanitarian 
plans. Please report yours to FTS, either by email to fts@un.org or through the online contribution report 
form at http://fts.unocha.org



www.unocha.org/south-sudan
www.humanitarianresponse.info/en/operations/south-sudan
@OCHASouthSudan
UNOCHA South Sudan



