OCCUPIED 
PALESTINIAN 
TERRITORY 
DEC 2018 
2018-2020 
RESPONSE STRATEGY 
HUMANITARIAN 
JANUARY-DECEMBER 2019 HUMANITARIAN RESPONSE PLAN 
Over 6,000 trauma surgeries have been performed by local surgeons, supported by emergency medical teams deployed to Gaza. 
Photo by: MAP-UK

02 
PART I: . . 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
Israel 
Jordan 
JORDAN RI VER 
Medi t e r ran e an Se a 
Dead S ea 
Lebanon 
Occupied Golan Heights 
(Syria) 
Syria 
LAKE 
TIB ERI AS 
Tubas 
Jenin 
Nablus 
Hebron
Salfit 
Tulkarm 
Jericho 
Ramallah 
Bethlehem 
Area A&B 
Area C 
Access 
Restricted 
Area 
Qalqiliya 
East 
Jerusalem 
H2 
Acre 
Haifa 
Ashdod 
Tiberias 
Nazareth 
Be'er Sheva 
Tel Aviv-Yaffo 
Gaza City 
Khan Yunis 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
Rafah 
Al ‘Ojah / Nitzana 
Karak 
Balqa 
Amman 
Irbid 
Madaba 
Ajloun 
Al Qunaytirah 
¥ 
West Bank 0.2M 
Gaza Strip 
People targeted 
People 
targeted 
1.2M 
SUMMARY OF REQUIREMENTS 
BY LOCATION 
West Bank 
Gaza 
$80M 
$270M 
Total 
Requirements 
$350M 
PEOPLE TARGETED 1.4M 
TOTAL 
POPULATION 
4.95M 
PEOPLE IN NEED 
2.5M 
PEOPLE TARGETED 
1.4M 
REQUIREMENTS 
(US$) 
350M 
# HUMANITARIAN 
PARTNERS 
88 
DISCLAIMER: The designations employed and the presentation of material on the maps contained in this document do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on 
the part of the Secretariat of the United Nations concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or 
boundaries. Reproduction and/or use of this material is only permitted with express reference to “United Nations OCHA oPt” as the source.

03 
PART I: . TABLE OF CONTENTS 
PART I: MULTI-YEAR COUNTRY STRATEGY 
Foreword by the Humanitarian Coordinator ...................... 04 
The Humanitarian Response Plan at a Glance ................. 05 
Overview of the Crisis ......................................................... 06 
Multi-Year Strategic Objectives .......................................... 08 
Multi-Year Response Strategy ............................................ 09 
Response Monitoring .......................................................... 13 
Resource Mobilisation .................................................... 14 
PART II: 2019 OPERATIONS 
2019 Humanitarian Response Plan ............................. 16 
Operational Capacity ........................................................... 17 
Humanitarian Access ......................................................... 19 
Summary of Cluster Responses ............................................ 22 
Protection ............................................................................ 26 
Water, Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH) ............................ 30 
Food Security ....................................................................... 33 
Health and Nutrition .......................................................... 36 
Education ............................................................................ 39 
Shelter and Non-Food Items (NFIs) ....................................... 42 
Coordination and Support Services (CSS) ........................... 45 
Guide to Giving .................................................................... 48 
PART III: ANNEXES 
Objectives, Indicators & Targets ......................................... 50 
Participating Organizations & Funding Requirements ...... 53 
What if? ... We fail to respond ............................................ 55

04 
PART I: Foreword by the humanitaria n coordinat or 
FOREWORD BY 
THE HUMANITARIAN 
COORDINATOR 
The Humanitarian Response Plan for the occupied Palestinian 
territory (oPt) for 2019 requests a total of US$350 million. 
This reflects a reduction by $200 million compared to last 
year. Overall, 1.4 million will be targeted in 2019, as compared 
to 1.9 million in 2018. This lower number in requested 
funding and targeted people does however not reflect a 
reduction in the level of humanitarian need in the oPt. On 
the contrary - this year has seen a serious deterioration in the 
humanitarian situation in the occupied Palestinian territory 
(oPt), particularly in Gaza, with recurrent outbreaks of 
violence and an enormous rise in casualties from the “Great 
March of Return” demonstrations. 
In addition to the rising needs, humanitarian actors have faced 
record low funding levels in 2018, following the decision by 
the US to cut its financial support for humanitarian assistance 
for the oPt, which has affected primarily UNRWA, and some 
INGOs in the humanitarian community. This trend is likely 
to continue in 2019, with other donors indicating that at best 
current funding levels will be maintained. 
Humanitarian actors in the oPt are further facing an 
increasingly constrained operational environment, with 
politically motivated groups seeking to undermine some UN 
and NGO operations. Time and effort spent on rebutting 
spurious allegations is diverting the attention of managers 
from operational priorities. 
Recognizing that the humanitarian situation, resources 
required to meet needs and operating space will not 
improve in the foreseeable future, we are shifting away 
from a ‘business as usual’ approach. Following extensive 
consultations in Jerusalem, Ramallah and Gaza with all key 
stakeholders, we have recalibrated our response to come up 
with a new plan for 2019 to reflect the current realities in 
which we operate. The full range of humanitarian needs is 
set out in detail in the accompanying Humanitarian Needs 
Overview (HNO), with some 2.5 million people identified as 
in need of humanitarian assistance and protection in 2019. 
In targeting 1.4 million people of these for humanitarian 
assistance, the Humanitarian Response Plan (HRP) is based 
on the maximum number of vulnerable people we believe we 
can realistically reach in the current non-conducive political 
and resource climate. 
Due to the enormous rise in casualties from the ‘Great March 
of Return’ demonstrations at the Gaza fence, with injuries 
having surpassed those recorded during the 2014 Gaza 
hostilities, funding requested for health is the only one that 
has gone up to reflect the surge in demand on the already 
overburdened health sector in Gaza. Overall, however, 
humanitarian needs remain high. The World Bank described 
Gaza’s economy as in ‘freefall’ with socio-economic indicators 
such as unemployment, poverty and food insecurity being on 
the rise. Economic growth is also declining the West Bank 
where settlement expansion, settler violence, demolitions 
and evictions are intensifying the coercive environment 
on vulnerable Palestinian communities. We therefore 
maintain the centrality of protection as a shared system-wide 
responsibility. 
During the consultation process, donors expressed their 
appreciation for a focused and targeted HRP. Accordingly, 
we expect that our partners will increase their funding to 
enable us to meet the most urgent of priority needs in the 
oPt, to protect the rights of Palestinians under occupation 
and provide basic services for the most vulnerable. More 
contributions - in particular ongoing commitments to ensure 
continuity in assistance, rather than one-time disbursements 
- and support for operational space would enable us to do 
more in supporting the ability of Palestinians to cope with, 
and overcome, the effects of the protracted crisis while more 
sustainable solutions are sought. 
Jamie McGoldrick 
Humanitarian Coordinator

05 
PART I: The Humanitaria n Response Plan at a glance 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
West Bank 
Israel 
Gaza 
Strip 
Egypt 
Jordan 
JORDAN RI VER 
M e d i t e r r a n e a n S e a 
D e a d S e a 
Lebanon 
Occupied Golan Heights 
(Syria) 
GULF OF 
AQABA 
L A K E 
T I B E R I A S 
AQAB A 
Tubas 
Jenin 
Nablus 
Hebron
Salfit 
Tulkarm 
Jericho 
Ramallah
Bethlehem 
Qalqiliya 
Jerusalem 
Acre 
Eilat 
Haifa 
Ashdod 
Tiberias 
Nazareth 
Be'er Sheva 
Tel Aviv-Yaffo 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
Rafah 
Allenby / 
King Hussein 
Jordan River Sheikh Hussein 
Wadi ‘Arraba 
Taba 
Al ‘Ojah / Nitzana 
o 
Ajloun 
0 15 30 60
Km 
Gaza North Gaza 
Khan Yunis Middle Area 
Rafah 
73 
82 
79 
77 
75 
39 
44 
27 
38 
44 
38 
33 
35 
32 
25 38 
THE HUMANITARIAN RESPONSE PLAN 
AT A GLANCE 
PEOPLE IN NEED 
2.5M 
REQUIREMENTS (US$) 
350M 
PEOPLE TARGETED 
1.4M 
OPERATIONAL PRESENCE: NUMBER OF PARTNERS 
PEOPLE WHO NEED HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE 
2.5M 
PALESTINE REFUGEES IN NEED 
1.4M 
INTERNALLY DISPLACED PEOPLE 
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 1 
The rights of Palestinians living under 
occupation, including those living under 
the blockade and other restrictions, are 
protected, respected and promoted 
in accordance with International 
Humanitarian Law (IHL) and International 
Human Rights Law (IHRL), while dutybearers 
are increasingly held to account. 
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 2 
The basic needs of vulnerable 
Palestinians living under occupation are 
met through the provision of quality 
basic services and improved access to 
resources, in accordance with the rights 
of protected persons under IHL. 
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 3 
The capacity of vulnerable Palestinians to 
cope with and overcome the protracted 
crisis, including from environmental 
threats, is supported, while solutions 
to violations and other root causes of 
threats and shocks are pursued. 
1.1M 
14K 
0.3M 
FOOD-INSECURE PEOPLE 
1.7M* 
Gaza 
West Bank 
Food-Insecure people Refugees in need Children Gaza Damaged Homes 
Total partners 
88 
* Socio-Economic Food Security Survey 2018 Preliminary Results

06 
PART I: Overview of the crisis 
OVERVIEW OF 
THE CRISIS 
GAZA STRIP 
In the Gaza Strip, after years of a relative absence of armed conflict there has been a sharp deterioration 
in the humanitarian, human rights, security and political situation in 2018, and an enormous rise in 
Palestinian casualties, as a result of the “Great March of Return” demonstrations. Between 30 March 
and end October, 228 Palestinians, including 43 children, have been killed by Israeli forces in the 
demonstrations and other circumstances. Over 24,000 Palestinians have been injured, including over 
5,800 wounded by live ammunition, overwhelming the already overstretched health sector in Gaza.1 
Patients referred outside for medical treatment unavailable in Gaza, especially those injured in the 
demonstrations, continue to face major access constraints through the Israeli-controlled Erez crossing, 
with only 59 per cent approved in the first half of 2018. Access restrictions in Gaza have only partly 
been alleviated by the re-opening of the Egyptian-controlled Rafah crossing almost continuously 
since May, where passengers are subject to unclear selection criteria, challenging crossing procedures 
and long delays. Although some participants in the demonstrations have launched incendiary and 
explosive devices and breached the perimeter fence into Israel, the large number of casualties among 
unarmed participants who pose no imminent threat of life or deadly injury to Israeli soldiers, has raised 
concerns about the excessive use of force and calls for an independent and transparent investigation 
into these incidents.2 
For much of 2018, power cuts of 18-20 hours a day have impeded the delivery of basic services and 
crippled productive activity, with hospitals, water and sewage treatment facilities, and solid waste 
collection services almost completely reliant on UN-coordinated emergency fuel to maintain essential 
services: in October, the delivery of fuel funded by Qatar has provided a welcome, if temporary, 
improvement in the electricity supply. The coastal aquifer, Gaza’s sole water source, has been virtually 
depleted by over-extraction and the intrusion of seawater, forcing the impoverished population to 
buy trucked water, often of poor quality, at up to 20 times the expense of water from the network.3 
Israel’s 11-year-long land, air and sea blockade, imposed following the violent takeover of Gaza by 
Hamas, has crippled the economy, resulting in high levels of unemployment, food insecurity and aid 
dependency. The Gaza economy is in ‘free fall’ according to the World Bank,4 with unemployment 
reaching 54 per cent in the second quarter of 2018, and over 70 per cent of young people and 78 
per cent of women unemployed. Poverty has soared to 53 per cent and food insecurity to 68 per 
cent. Severely reduced purchasing power is compounded by the Palestinian Authority’s (PA) policy 
of withholding the payment of salaries and allowances to employees, alongside a cut in reconstruction 
and development aid, particularly by the US government, with the real income of a Palestinian in 
Gaza now about 30 per cent less than it was in 1999.5 There is a palpable loss of hope and rising 
desperation among the population in Gaza, which is eroding coping mechanisms and resilience, while 
rising violence and tension are fuelling concerns of a renewed escalation of hostilities. 

07 
PART I: Overview of the crisis 
WEST BANK 
In the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, Israel’s direct 
military occupation continues, and with it the appropriation 
of land and resources. While the humanitarian situation 
is less grave than in Gaza, the economy “is expected to 
slow considerably in the coming period,” according to the 
World Bank.6 Standards of living, economic growth and 
employment prospects continued to be undermined by 
limitations on access to land while freedom of movement 
is significantly restricted by a multi-layered system of 
administrative, bureaucratic and physical constraints, 
citing security concerns. The PA is prevented from 
operating in East Jerusalem and Area C, which represent 
more than 60 per cent of the West Bank and contain the 
most valuable natural resources. After a decline in recent 
years, settler violence resulting in Palestinian casualties 
or in damage to property is increasing with 217 incidents 
recorded by the end of October, compared with 197 in all 
of 2017. 7 
The demolition of residential, livelihood and service 
infrastructure has continued in the West Bank, including 
East Jerusalem. As of 31 October, 361 structures were 
demolished or seized and 381 people displaced, marking 
a 4 and 36 per cent decline, respectively, compared to 
the equivalent figures in 2017. Demolitions represent 
one element of a coercive environment affecting many 
Palestinians throughout the West Bank, including East 
Jerusalem, which include the restrictions on access to 
natural resources; the denial of basic service infrastructure; 
and the lack of secure residency promotion of plans 
to relocate communities to urban townships, with the 
case of Khan al Ahmar–Abu al Helu most prominent in 
2018.8 These practices are often implemented against a 
backdrop of the establishment and expansion of Israeli 
settlements. The coercive environment has also resulted 
in instances of forcible transfer of Palestinians from their 
homes in the settlement area of Hebron city, reducing a 
once thriving area to a ‘ghost town’. This deterioration 
in 2018 throughout the oPt is exacerbated by significant 
shortfalls in donor support for the Palestinian Authority 
(PA), UNRWA and humanitarian operations in general, 
undermining the ability of the international community 
to effectively respond to increasing need. All these 
developments are accompanied by increasing restrictions 
and attacks on humanitarian partners, which are generating 
an increasingly constrained operational context. 
PALESTINIAN CASUALTIES IN THE OPT AND ISRAEL 
January till 3rd of December 2018 
Fatalities Injuries 
WEST BANK 
AND ISRAEL 
GAZA 
STRIP 
x31* 
x253** 
x5,580 
x 22,799*** 
PALESTINIAN INJURIES IN THE OPT AND ISRAEL 
Live 
ammunition 
26% 
Other Weapon 
23% 
Rubber bullet 
(all types) 
6% 
Tear gas canister 
(inhalation) 
45% 
28,366 
Injuries by 
Weapon 
* Excluding one Palestinian citizen of Israel killed by Israel forces. 
**Excluding one Palestinian from the West Bank killed by a rocket from Gaza. 
*** Source of Palestinian injuries is based on what OCHA received from the Palestinian Ministry of Health (MoH), PRCS 
and other Human Rights Organizations. 
January till 3rd of December 2018

08 
PART I: MULTI-YE AR STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES 
MULTI-YEAR 
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES 
The 2019 Humanitarian Response Plan (HRP) will mark the second year of the 2018-2020 multiyear 
humanitarian response strategy. The strategy and its Strategic Objectives remain valid for 
2019. During 2019, humanitarian partners will continue to address the needs jointly identified by 
the humanitarian community in the 2019 HNO, by protecting the rights of Palestinians living under 
occupation, providing access to basic services for those who are vulnerable, and supporting the 
ability of Palestinians to cope with, and overcome, the protracted crisis, while more sustainable 
solutions are sought. 
The rights of Palestinians living 
under occupation, including those 
living under the blockade and other 
restrictions, are protected, respected 
and promoted in accordance with 
International Humanitarian Law (IHL) 
and International Human Rights 
Law (IHRL), while duty-bearers are 
increasingly held to account. 
325,000 
PEOPLE TARGETED 
$52 MILLION 
FUNDING 
REQUIREMENTS 
The basic needs of vulnerable 
Palestinians living under 
occupation are met through 
the provision of quality basic 
services and improved access 
to resources, in accordance with 
the rights of protected persons 
under IHL. 
1,727,568* 
PEOPLE TARGETED 
$71 MILLION 
FUNDING 
REQUIREMENTS 
The capacity of vulnerable 
Palestinians to cope with, and 
overcome, the protracted crisis, 
including from environmental 
threats, is supported, while 
solutions to violations and 
other root causes of threats and 
shocks are pursued. 
479,653** 
PEOPLE TARGETED 
$227 MILLION 
FUNDING 
REQUIREMENTS 
1 2 3 
* Some beneficiaries are targeted in more than one intervention. 
** Excluding food security due to data which indicates food insecurity level, not the number of beneficiaries.

09 
PART I: MULTI-YE AR RESPONSE STRATEGY 
The 2019 HRP will mark the second year of the 2018-2020 multi-year 
humanitarian response strategy. Some 2.5 million people have been jointly 
identified by the humanitarian community as in need of humanitarian assistance 
and protection in 2019. These needs will be addressed through efforts that protect 
the rights of Palestinians living under occupation, provide access to basic services 
for those who are vulnerable, and support the ability of Palestinians to cope with 
and overcome the effects of the protracted crisis, while more sustainable solutions 
are sought. The 2019 HRP will maintain the centrality of protection9 at all levels 
of humanitarian actions, as a shared system-wide responsibility. Humanitarian 
actors will remain committed to ensuring principled humanitarian action in the 
current restrictive operational context. Humanitarian partners will continue to 
urge relevant authorities to uphold their responsibilities and dedicate resources 
for humanitarian protection and assistance. The geographical scope of the 
strategy continues to be Area C, East Jerusalem, H2/Hebron and the Gaza Strip. 
MULTI-YEAR 
RESPONSE STRATEGY 
Despite increasing needs, the number of people targeted 
for humanitarian assistance and protection in 2019 will be 
lower than the previous year. Some 1.4 million people will 
be targeted in 2019, as compared to 1.9 million in 2018. 
This reduction is due to the politicization of international 
humanitarian funding for the oPt, leading to the lowest 
funding levels ever, and the shrinking of operational space 
for humanitarian action. As a result, humanitarian actors 
have been forced to reduce their planned interventions 
for 2019 by strictly focusing on top priority needs alone, 
in coherence with the funding predicted for the year. 
This approach knowingly and unwillingly leaves many 
Palestinians without the humanitarian assistance and 
protection they critically need, a gap the humanitarian 
community stands ready and able to fill should operational 
conditions improve and funding increase. However, it is 
the maximum that humanitarian actors can realistically be 
expected to achieve in the prevailing environment. 
To fit within this restricted framework, seven strategic 
elements guided the development of the 2019 HRP: 
1 PRIORITIZE THE RESPONSE STARTEGY AND CLUSTERS 
ACTIVITIES 
The response plan is strictly prioritized to ensure the most 
effective and needs-based use of resources in a context 
where humanitarian needs outweigh available funding. 
Therefore, the 2019 HRP has been strictly prioritized to 
include activities aimed at targeting the most vulnerable 
people in need, in accordance and scale with available 
humanitarian capacities. The purpose of this approach 
is to present a more realistic plan of what can actually 
be achieved in 2019, given the existing humanitarian 
capabilities and constraints in the oPt; to draw a clearer 
distinction between humanitarian programmes, recovery 
and development interventions; and to remove the 
projects with recovery and development activities from 
the HRP. The HRP ensures the greatest impact possible, 
with priority given to the most vulnerable. As a result, the 
current HRP request is more than 30 per cent lower than 
the previous year, and the lowest since 2006. 
Categorize 
cluster 
activities 
Ensure 
centrality 
of protection 
Expand 
local ownership 
and partnership 
Put 
affected people 
at the center 
Ensure 
gender and 
age mainstreaming 
Strengthen 
emergency 
response preparedness 
Prioritize 
response and 
activities 
7 KEY STRATEGY ELEMENTS 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7

10 
PART I: MULTI-YE AR RESPONSE STRATEGY 
In coherence with the centrality of protection to all aspects 
of the 2019 HRP, activities have been organized according 
to a global protection conceptual model developed by 
ICRC in 2001, commonly known as the “protection 
egg”. This model divides into three groups the various 
activities undertaken by humanitarian and human rights 
organizations when the authorities have failed to meet 
their obligations under international law: responsive 
activities; remedial activities; and activities that contribute 
towards environment-building. These three groups – or 
types of activities – constitute a protection framework 
which may be imagined in the form of an egg and which is 
meant to convey the non-hierarchical and interdependent 
nature of the activities as well as the possibility of carrying 
them out simultaneously.10 This typology of response will 
also help to reinforce the centrality of protection in the 
HRP, by framing all humanitarian engagement towards 
addressing protection violations. 
Protection mainstreaming throughout the HRP remains 
central to ensuring that a protection lens is incorporated 
into all cluster activities. The Protection Cluster has 
RESPONSIVE ACTIVITIES 
Activities that prevent and stop protection violations or abuses and/or alleviate immediate needs/effects of protection 
violations. 
REMEDIAL ACTIVITIES 
Priority activities that go beyond immediate response towards addressing time-sensitive or high impact underlying 
issues, advancing the top priority resilience needs, additional priority/time sensitive activities that support affected 
people or prevent secondary protection abuses or risks. 
ENVIRONMENTAL-BUILDING ACTIVITIES 
Activities that address critical gaps in their system or context, which result in widespread need. These may be systemwide 
activities and/or are those linked to the protracted nature of the crisis, which if addressed, would decrease the need 
for responsive activities listed above. These could be activities that contribute to environment that encourages authorities 
to respect their obligations and rights of individuals; change in attitudes, policies, values, beliefs; address underlying 
causes of humanitarian vulnerabilities (but only where the solution remains a humanitarian solution). 
2 CATEGORIZE CLUSTER 
ACTIVITIES 
3 EXPAND LOCAL ACTION, OWNERSHIP 
AND PARTNERSHIP 
4 ENSURE THE CENTRALITY OF PROTECTION 
IN ADVOCACY AND RESPONSE 
refined the mainstreaming process and built on previous 
efforts to ensure that other clusters are consulted and 
kept informed throughout the process. Given the 
The oPt humanitarian community continues to recognize 
that national and local responders – comprising 
governments, communities, local and national NGOs, 
and local civil society – play a critical role in the 
implementation of humanitarian assistance in Gaza and 
the West Bank. In line with global commitments on 
localization, as defined in the Grand Bargain, efforts will 
be maximized to increase the engagement of local partners 
in designing intervention strategies and providing 
assistance. Donors will be called upon to increase funding 
to frontline partners through direct or partnership 
agreements, or through the HC-led, OCHA-managed, 
Country Based Pooled Fund, the oPt Humanitarian Fund 
(oPt HF). In 2018, the oPt HF disbursed 27 per cent of its 
total funding directly to national NGOs, and an additional 
30 per cent of its funding to projects implemented by 
UN agencies or international NGOs in partnership with 
national NGOs. UN agencies and international NGOs 
will be encouraged to continue to establish meaningful 
partnerships with local and national actors, wherever 
possible and appropriate. Clusters in the oPt will continue 
to work in close collaboration with their Palestinian 
line ministry counterparts, sharing coordination 
responsibilities for strategy development, intervention 
planning and operations wherever possible. The HCT, 
cluster coordinators and OCHA – as facilitators of the 
system – will seek to identify the barriers to participation 
in coordination and to better include local and national 
responders in international coordination mechanisms.

11 
PART I: MULTI-YE AR RESPONSE STRATEGY 
5 PUT AFFECTED PEOPLE AT THE CENTER 
AND PROMOTE ACCOUNTABILITY TO THEM 
6 ENSURE GENDER 
AND AGE MAINSTREAMING 
Community engagement is recognized at the country level 
as a priority for humanitarian response in the oPt, both 
in terms of the integration of community engagement 
throughout the programme cycle, particularly at the 
project level, but also in terms of maintaining continuous 
engagement with communities on a day-to-day basis. A 
wide range of methodologies for community engagement 
are utilized by oPt humanitarian partners to provide 
communities with information, collect feedback and 
ensure their participation in the decision-making 
processes. These community engagement methodologies 
include regular face-to-face interactions, consultations 
with civil society actors, and information sharing through 
local media. Considering the high levels of community 
engagement activities that were indicated by cluster 
partners at the project development stage for 2019, a 
structured analysis and discussion at the Inter-Cluster 
Coordination Group (ICCG) and Humanitarian Country 
Team (HCT) levels on cluster achievements is planned, 
with the objective of carrying the work forward throughout 
the 2018-2020 HPC, to further systematize the intercluster 
approach to community engagement in the oPt. For 
the 2019 project cycle, the national (Gaza and West Bank) 
ICCG has incorporated structured community engagement 
components in the project development (through the 
project sheets) for the second year, in order to better analyse 
the scope of planned community engagement activities, at 
the project design, implementation and monitoring and 
evaluation phases. In 2019, the inter-agency Protection 
from Sexual Exploitation and Abuse (PSEA) Network 
that was established in 2018 under the auspices of the HC 
will focus on implementing an inter-agency Action Plan 
on PSEA and jointly explore ways to ensure prevention 
of and response to SEA, including beneficiary awareness 
raising, community-based complaints mechanisms and the 
provision of victim assistance. 
Throughout the HPC, gender mainstreaming remains a 
priority for the oPt humanitarian community. The HCT 
is committed to delivering a response that is sensitive 
and appropriate to the distinct needs and vulnerabilities 
of persons of different genders and ages. The full scale 
roll-out of the IASC Gender and Age Marker (GAM) 
in the 2019 planning cycle, replacing the IASC Gender 
Marker, reaffirms the HCT’s commitment to gender 
mainstreaming as a means for ensuring the highest quality 
humanitarian programming in line with international 
standards. Moving on to implementation and monitoring 
COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT ACTIVITIES IN THE 2019 HRP PROJECTS 
0 1-5 5+ 
Number of planned focus group 
discussions 
6% 
(12 projects) 
46% 
(94 projects) 
48% 
(97 projects 
Number of information products and other 
type of outreach planned 
10% 
(19 projects) 
50% 
(102 projects) 
40% 
(82 projects) 
Yes No 
Feedback/complaints mechanisms 97% 
(196 projects) 
3% 
(7 projects) 
Community Engagement in M&E 97% 
(196 projects) 
3% 
(7 projects) 
of humanitarian activities at the beginning of 2019, the 
oPt HCT will ensure that the humanitarian response is 
adequately tailored and adapted to address the specific needs 
of different population groups. The GAM strengthens 
the original IASC Gender Marker by including age and, 
most significantly, by adding a monitoring component. 
In addition to measuring programme effectiveness, it is 
a valuable teaching and self-monitoring tool, allowing 
organizations to learn by developing programmes 
that respond to all aspects of diversity. In 2019, the 
Humanitarian Gender Group (HGG), co-chaired by 
operational context in the oPt, the centrality of protection 
is mainstreamed throughout the HRP, through clear 
and comprehensively-defined protection concerns and 
priorities. Protection concerns are the primary drivers 
of humanitarian need in the oPt which inform each 
cluster’s response plan. Cluster responses are guided by 
the need to ensure that there is full respect for the rights 
of Palestinians in accordance with international law. 
Therefore, protection is mainstreamed throughout 
interventions in the HRP both through protectionfocused 
or protection-sensitive programming, as well 
as advocacy efforts that call for respect for IHL and 
IHRL and accountability for violations.

12 
PART I: MULTI-YE AR RESPONSE STRATEGY 
UN Women and OCHA, will continue to strengthen its 
role throughout the HPC, by ensuring gender and age 
mainstreaming in the cluster-specific needs analysis, 
response planning, implementation and monitoring. 
For 2019, a total of 89 per cent of HRP projects were given 
either a 4M or 4T gender marker score during the cluster 
vetting process, indicating a high level commitment by 
partners to contributing significantly to gender equality, 
including across age groups, through their humanitarian 
interventions. The scoring was automatically generated 
by the GAM tool, based on questionnaires that partners 
answered. With the support from cluster gender focal 
points, the humanitarian community will continue to 
strive for a high percentage of 4M or 4T GAM scoring 
during the implementation and evaluation phases. 
GAM Code Number of 
projects 
Proportion of Total 
Projects (%) 
4(M) or 4(T) 180 89% 
3(M) or 3(T) 15 7% 
2(M) or 2(T) 1 0.5% 
1(M) or 1(T) 6 3% 
Not Applicable 1 0.5% 
While the main focus of the HRP is to address humanitarian 
needs, there is also a continuing need to incorporate 
efforts to enhance the ability of Palestinian individuals, 
communities and institutions to anticipate, respond to, and 
recover from the impacts of likely, imminent or current 
shocks. To be effective, these efforts must be coordinated 
and encompass a number of different activities, approaches, 
and actors, including the humanitarian community. 
Access restrictions and the lack of one unified central 
government authority for humanitarian assistance in the 
oPt necessitate a continued need for close cooperation 
and coordination with local partners and communities 
regarding Emergency Response Preparedness (ERP) 
and Disaster Risk Management (DRM), so that localized 
emergency response and humanitarian assistance 
effectively reaches people and communities. For example, 
dedicated community focal points are identified to facilitate 
community engagement in community-level emergency 
response plans. 
In 2019, the humanitarian community will maintain 
high-levels of preparedness in Gaza and will continue to 
consolidate response readiness activities in the West Bank. 
Inter-agency and inter-cluster contingency planning for 
Gaza will be maintained and updated regularly; operational 
emergency response planning for the West Bank will be 
further strengthened. Key determinants of operational 
readiness for the oPt include regular mapping/updating 
of response capabilities, and regular reconfirmation and 
testing of emergency coordination structures and concept 
of operations within the humanitarian community and 
with key external actors. In Gaza, Designated Emergency 
Shelters (DES) will be maintained and upgraded, and 
a unified IDP information management system will be 
developed. 
There will also be continuing follow up on emergency 
capacity building on a regional level with Palestinian, Israeli 
and Jordanian counterparts, as part of the Professional 
Dialogue, which can contribute to institution-building 
and to helping bridge humanitarian operational readiness 
activities with policy development and institutionbuilding 
activities within the development sphere. This 
includes continued support for the development of joint 
Early Warning Systems against flooding and seismological 
events, as well as of joint protocols between the three 
counterparts on the coordination of international 
humanitarian assistance., With the establishment of a new 
Palestinian DRM system, humanitarian perspectives will 
also be shared with the relevant authorities, in particular 
regarding operational readiness, and related coordination 
efforts. 
7 STRENGTHEN EMERGENCY 
RESPONSE PREPAREDNESS MEASURES

13 
PART I: RESPONSE MONITORING 
The 2018-2020 monitoring framework was finalized in 
2018. The strategic level monitoring framework contains 
multi-year targets for the higher level three Strategic 
Objectives and has been designed to assess outcomes 
derived directly from cluster objective outcomes. The 
indicators under the Strategic Objectives have been 
developed to measure the outcome of humanitarian 
assistance, e.g. reduction in caseloads, rather than 
measuring the outcome monitored by linking it to other 
spheres of work, e.g. recovery and development. In 
addition, financial figures have been generated for each 
Strategic Objective, allowing the ICCG to track funding 
requirements and the funding received by each Strategic 
Objective. The information derived from both the 
funding coverage and the achievements against targets by 
strategic objective provides a comprehensive analysis on 
the extent to which the humanitarian community in the 
oPt is meeting the goals set out in the multi-year strategy. 
In terms of monitoring and reporting, the achievements 
against Strategic Objectives are monitored twice a year 
and published through the HRP Periodic Mid-Year 
Monitoring Report (PMR) and the End-of-Year Report. 
While the indicators under the Strategic Objectives will 
remain valid for three years along with their three year 
targets, these will be updated/re-validated on an annual 
basis. Aligned with the prioritization of activities for 
2019 HRP, clusters also updated/re-validated outcome 
indicators under cluster objectives and output indicators 
under cluster activities. 
HPC TOOLS 
The indicators under the Strategic Objectives, Cluster 
Objectives and Cluster activities continue to be monitored 
by the ICCG with disaggregated data by gender, age and 
geographical area. The monitored data will be tracked 
RESPONSE 
MONITORING 
The oPt 2018-2020 monitoring framework continues to consist of multi-year 
strategic objectives and related outcome indicators to which are linked the cluster 
objectives and related outcome indicators, and the single-year cluster activities and 
output indicators. 
through the Response Planning Module (RPM), which will 
visualize the data through HPC InSight that will be available 
to the public. HPC tools are the information services 
provided by OCHA which enables the humanitarian 
community to manage the structured information around 
the HPC: needs indicators, strategic and cluster plan 
frameworks, response indicators, caseloads, activities and 
projects, and financial data. 
The Projects Module that replaced the previous Online 
Projects System (OPS) has been rolled out for the 2019 
oPt HRP to support the management of the HRP projects 
throughout the HPC process. The Projects Module 
connects projects to the overall strategic framework, 
and allows the disaggregation of projects by location, 
vulnerable geographic areas and by activity type. This 
has played a critical role in supporting the development 
of a well-targeted plan. The intuitive nature of the HPC 
suite of modules allows the humanitarian community to 
conduct a quick, but thorough, analysis of the projects visà-
vis monitoring and reporting to inform the upper level 
strategic planning process. 
IASC GENDER WITH AGE MARKER 
The IASC Gender with Age Marker (GAM) has been 
rolled out for the 2019 planning cycle, replacing the 
previous IASC Gender Marker. Gender mainstreaming 
will be ensured throughout the HPC by measuring the 
GAM code during both the planning phrase and the 
project implementation and monitoring phrases. This selfmonitoring 
tool will encourage organizations to learn by 
developing and implementing programmes that respond 
to all aspects of diversity to ensure gender mainstreaming 
and community engagement. 
HUMANITARIAN PROGRAMME CYCLE TIMELINE 
Dashboard 
Monitoring Report 
Humanitarian Needs Overview 
Humanitarian Response Plan 
JAN FEB MAR APR MAY JUN JUL AUG SEP OCT NOV DEC JAN FEB 
2018 2019

14 
PART I: Resource mobilizati on 
An annual update of the financial requirements for the 
humanitarian response will be produced in 2019 and 
2020, as the HRP projects will be updated on a yearly basis. 
Inter-cluster achievement monitoring products are issued 
on a monthly basis, as described in the previous section, 
to document the status of response implementation and 
to support system-wide donor engagement and resource 
mobilisation. 
In addition, implementation at the country level of the 
commitments made in the framework of the Grand 
Bargain agreement of the World Humanitarian Summit 
will be sought over the three-year period, including the 
commitment made to increase the proportion of HRP 
funding through the Country Based Pooled Fund (CBPF). 
The oPt Humanitarian Fund (oPt HF) supports the 
delivery of strategic humanitarian response in accordance 
with humanitarian principles and in line with the 
RESOURCE 
MOBILIZATION 
response priorities outlined in the HRP, while retaining 
the flexibility to allocate funds to unforeseen needs. In 
2018, $22 million was allocated through the oPt HF 
(double the amount in 2017), amounting to 4 per cent of 
the total financial requirements of the 2018 HRP. With the 
recognition that CBPFs play a crucial role in delivering the 
Grand Bargain commitments, the oPt HF has subscribed 
to the global goal of reaching 15 per cent of the funding 
requirements of the HRP. In this spirit, the Humanitarian 
Coordinator (HC) decided in 2018 to strive towards again 
increasing the oPt HF value in the coming year to reach at 
least 5 per cent of the HRP requirements. 
Financial contributions to humanitarian activities in 
the oPt will be monitored through the online Financial 
Tracking Service (FTS) platform, to which all partners 
participating in the HRP are obliged to report, and which 
is made available to the public.11 
Mobilisation of sufficient resources and enhancement of the predictability of 
humanitarian financing for the oPt will be of critical importance and remains 
a priority of the HCT throughout the multi-year cycle. A robust HCT fundraising 
and outreach advocacy strategy for the 2019 HRP will be developed involving all 
HCT members to enable the implementation of the humanitarian interventions 
contained in the plan, supported by a multi-year monitoring framework. This will 
be accompanied by reinvigorated, coordinated outreach to donors, undertaken by 
the HC and all members of the HCT, as well as by myself. The 2019 HCT fundraising 
and outreach advocacy strategy will also include enhanced dialogue with donors to 
strengthen the synergies between humanitarian and development funding for the 
oPt. 
TOTAL TO NUTMABELR ONF BUENMEFIBCIAERRIES OOFF OP BT HEF NPREOJFECITCS IINA 2R01I8ES OF OPT HF PROJECTS IN 2018 
3,136,325* 
*Some benefeciaires may have benefited from more than one project. 
Girls 
Women Men 
Total number of beneficiaries 
Boys 
752,776 
773,351 
745,066 
865,132 
TOTAL NUMBER OF BENEFICIARIES OF OPT HF PROJECTS IN 2018

15 
PART I: Resource mobilizati on 
PART II 
2019 OPERATIONS 
2019 Humanitarian Response Plan 
Operational Capacity 
Humanitarian Access 
Cluster Response Plans

PART II: 2019 HUMANITARIAN RESPONSE PLAN 
16 
2019 
HUMANITARIAN 
RESPONSE PLAN 
SUMMARY OF NEEDS, TARGETS & REQUIREMENTS 
PEOPLE IN NEED* 
2.5M 
PEOPLE TARGETED 
1.4M 
REQUIREMENTS (US$) 
350M 
* The overall number of people in need was calculated by aggregating the highest cluster caseload by governorate in order to provide a conservative estimate while minimizing the margin of error by 
using estimates provided by several clusters. Clusters estimates of people in need are based on a variety of sources including cluster partner data. 
BREAKDOWN OF PEOPLE TARGETED 
* Target shown is for UNRWA beneficiaries in HRP projects only. UNRWA targets additional beneficiaries through other channels. 
**Children (<18 years old), adult (18-59 years), elderly (>59 years) 
1,971,819 
1,900,635 
1,163,618 
1,700,000 
519,258 
304,628 
350,000 
1,071,284 
796,222 
1,408,700 
356,447 
85,620 
196,000 
949,384 
633,089 
1,300,000 
328,167 
47,425 
154,000 
121,900 
163,133 
108,700 
28,280 
38,195 
99,575 
589,745 
140,000 
1,031,275 
231,192 
19,845 
28% 
55% 
18% 
73% 
65% 
23% 
- 
589,745 
140,000 
1,013,093 
231,192 
- 
99,575 
- 
- 
18,182 
- 
19,845 
47% 
49% 
68% 
49% 
49% 
45%
% 
female 
% children, 
adult, 
elderly** 
TOTAL BY SEX & AGE 
People 
targeted 
People 
targeted 
Gaza 
UNRWA % 
of total target 
UNRWA* 
target 
People in need UNRWA 
target/Gaza 
UNRWA 
target/West 
Bank 
45% 
39% 
29%
47%
97% 
50% 
50% 
58% 
10%
48%
3% 
47% 
5% 
3% 
61% 
5% 
0% 
3% 
Gaza 
$270 Million 
Area C 
$59 Million 
East Jerusalem 
$10 Million 
H2/Hebron 
$6 Million 
Area A&B (Food Security) 
$5 Million 
$350 
Million 
$274 
Million 
$50 
Million 
$26 
Million 
Responsive 
Activities 
Remedial 
Activities 
Environmental 
Building 
Activities 
Food Security 
$206 Million 
Protection 
$36 Million 
Health 
& Nutrition 
$32 Million 
WASH 
$29 Million 
Coordination 
$18 Million 
Education 
$15 Million 
Shelter and NFIs 
$14 Million 
$350 
Million 
FUNDING REQUIREMENTS ($) BY TYPOLOGY OF RESPONSE 
FUNDING REQUIREMENTS ($) BY GEOGRAPHICAL AREA AND BY CLUSTER MULTI/SINGLE-YEAR 
PROJECTS IN THE 2019 
BREAKDOWN OF PEOPLE IN NEED AND TARGETED BY STATUS, SEX AND AGE 
* The funding requirements by geographical area and typology of response are based on partner estimates. 
$101 
million 
Requirement 
80 Projects 
123 Projects 
$249 
million 
Requirement 
Single-Year 
Projects 
Multi-Year Projects

PART II: Operati onal capa cit y 
17 
OPERATIONAL 
CAPACITY 
Protection WASH Health 
Food 
Security 
Shelter and 
NFIs Education Coordination Total by area 
ARA 20 9 8 15 5 11 8 55 
Rest of Gaza 25 11 17 19 11 14 9 71 
Gaza Total 25 14 17 20 11 14 9 72 
Area C 16 9 9 16 6 5 7 45 
East Jerusalem 14 2 4 3 1 4 8 28 
H2/Hebron 10 1 6 2 2 4 8 23 
West Bank Total 17 9 11 16 6 7 8 49 
Total oPt 32 19 21 25 19 14 10 88 
* The numbers presented in this table overlap, as partners may be active in more than one geographical area, and more than one cluster. 
The total number of 2019 participating organizations is 88. 
NUMBER OF PARTNERS BY AREA* 
Humanitarian partners have a well-established operational and protection presence 
across the oPt. In 2019, a total of 88 partners – international and national – have 
projects included in the HRP. 
The HCT involves 26 members engaged in the provision 
of humanitarian assistance and protection at the 
country level. Six clusters/sectors are active in the oPt, 
coordinating the activities of international and national 
partners: Protection Cluster, WASH Cluster, Health and 
Nutrition Cluster, Food Security Sector, Education Cluster 
and Shelter and NFI Cluster. Three globally-recognized 
sub-clusters operate under the auspices of the Protection 
Cluster, including Child Protection, Gender-Based 
Violence and Mine Action. A number of working groups, 
established to meet the specific operational requirements 
of the oPt, also operate under the leadership of the six 
clusters. 
In 2019, a total of 88 partners – international and national 
– have project included in the HRP. OCHA convenes and 
facilitates the work of the Inter-Cluster Coordination 
Group (ICCG) at national and sub-national levels in Gaza 
and West Bank. Deriving from critical needs that oblige a 
collective humanitarian response at the local level, the oPt 
national ICCG has developed two inter-cluster platforms 
to coordinate humanitarian response at the operational 
level. These sub-national platforms sit in the West Bank, 
of which East Jerusalem is a part, and in the Gaza Strip. 
This national/sub-national structure promotes the 
implementation of operational decisions within the scope 
of the HRP and national cluster standards. 
The establishment of the West Bank ICCG was proposed 
and discussed by the oPt ICCG in June 2017; endorsed by 
the Cluster Lead Agencies in November 2017; and approved 
by the HC and HCT in January 2018. The West Bank ICCG 
will continue to provide a geographically-focused platform 
for clusters/sectors to work together to jointly deliver 
an effective and efficient humanitarian response. This 
is done so by reaching a shared understanding of needs, 
informed by a robust protection and gender and analysis, 
and agreeing on joined-up operational plans to meet those 
needs. 
The participation of the National NGOs (NNGOs) through 
directly implementing projects to the HRP appear to be 
relatively unchanged compared to 2018 (7.2 per cent of the 
requirements in 2018 vs. 6.6 per cent of the requirements 

PART II: Operati onal capa cit y 
18 
Low High 
17K 550K 
PEOPLE IN NEED VS PARTNER ACTIVITIES 
Tubas 
Jenin 
Nablus 
Hebron 
Salfit 
Tulkarm 
Ramallah Jericho 
Bethlehem 
Qalqiliya 
Jerusalem 
North Gaza 
Gaza 
Khan Yunis 
Middle Area 
People in need 
Rafah 
84
94 
94 
96 
85 
39 
46 
27 
39 
48 
39 
33 
36 
33 
25 38 
XX Number of Activities 
PEOPLE IN NEED VS ACTIVITIES BY GOVERNORATE 
in 2019). The NNGO participation through partnerships 
with UN agencies or INGO has significantly increased 
from 33 per cent of requirements in 2018 to 51 per cent 
of requirements in 2019. In line with the Grand Bargain 
commitments, these positive statistics will continue to be 
pursued for the HRP projects, to ensure and strengthen the 
engagement with national NGOs through partnerships 
with UN and INGOs. 
FUNDING REQUIREMENTS 
BY TYPE OF ORGANIZATION 
INGO
$98 Million 
NNGO
$23 Million 
UN
$229 Million 
203 
TOTAL PROJECTS 
Partnership 
with NNGOs 
$179 Million

PART II: HUMANITARIAN ACCESS 
19 
HUMANITARIAN 
ACCESS 
During the course of 2018, humanitarian organizations faced a range of obstacles on the movement 
and access of affected people, humanitarian personnel and humanitarian goods as a result of 
political, security and administrative measures implemented by Israeli and Palestinian authorities. 
Impediments on the movement and access of humanitarian personnel included restrictions on 
obtaining requisite Israeli-issued permits, in particular for Gaza-based UN and INGO personnel 
to exit Gaza; intermittent closures at border crossings and checkpoints, resulting in the delay 
or denial of passage; the introduction of security measures at the Erez vehicular terminal; and 
the introduction of temporary restrictions on the import and export of goods from Gaza through 
Kerem Shalom crossing. Access restrictions hampered the delivery of materials needed for the 
implementation of humanitarian projects, including projects that involve building, expanding or 
rehabilitating infrastructure in the Gaza Strip and Area C of the West Bank, and responding to 
demolitions of housing or essential infrastructure. 
OPT-WIDE ACCESS ISSUES AFFECTING INGOS 
For INGOs working in the oPt, the Government of Israel’s 
freeze on the registration of organizations, which has been 
in place since 2013, has brought continuous, and increasing 
challenges. For many organizations not registered in the 
country, is not possible to obtain B1 work visas for their 
staff, forcing such organizations to apply for B2 work 
visas, which may limit the holder to working in the West 
Bank, and restricting their access to East Jerusalem and 
Gaza. Furthermore, the B2 work visa is only issued to staff 
members if their respective country representative office 
applies on their behalf directly to the Israeli authorities, 
which many countries do not do as a matter of policy. 
GAZA STRIP 
Access impediments are characterized mainly by the 
restrictions imposed by the Israel authorities on Gazabased 
UN and INGO personnel obtaining permits to exit 
Gaza and by restrictions imposed by Hamas on national 
and international personnel entering and exiting Gaza. 
During 2018, an increasing number of UN and INGO 
personnel were denied permits by the Israeli authorities 
to exit Gaza for reported security reasons and prohibited 
from submitting applications for a period of 12 months. In 
total, 78 UN personnel and 71 INGO personnel received 
these bans during 2018, compared with 41 UN staff 
members denied during 2017. Due to the security denials, 
the number of staff able to apply for permits to exit Gaza 
has decreased considerably; between January and October 
2018 UN agencies submitted 31 per cent fewer permit 
requests than in the same period of 2017. 
In April, the Israeli authorities introduced additional 
security measures at the Erez vehicular crossing that are 
contrary to UN privileges and immunities, including 
internal inspections of UN vehicles by sniffer dogs and the 
X-ray inspection of UN property. Further negotiations 
have allowed the UN pouch and some other UN property 
to be exempted from the searches; nevertheless, the 
remaining issues continue. 
During March, the Hamas authorities returned to the 
entrance of Gaza by establishing a post immediately 
south of the PA controlled terminal. The activities at this 
post are similar to those implemented by Hamas before 
November 2017, when they left the crossing as part of the 
Palestinian reconciliation process. Hamas representatives 
use this post to control all persons travelling in and out of 
Gaza, including the implementation of a permit regime for 
international INGO and diplomatic personnel. 
In May, the Egyptian authorities opened Rafah Crossing 
for Ramadan, and have extended the opening indefinitely, 
UN PERMITS FOR GAZA PERSONNEL, 2014 – 2018 
79% 78% 
54% 53% 
60% 
14% 17% 
9% 
35% 
21% 
4% 3% 
34% 
10% 18% 
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 (Nov) 
Approved Pending Denied

PART II: HUMANITARIAN ACCESS 
20 
with the crossing currently open daily except for Fridays, 
Saturdays and official holidays. This has been the longest 
extended opening of the crossing since July 2013, with 
Rafah Crossing open for 159 days for humanitarian cases 
and pre-registered Gaza ID holders including pilgrims, up 
to 31 October. During this time, 30,566 persons crossed 
into Gaza, whereas, 48,855 persons crossed into Egypt. In 
comparison, Rafah Crossing was only open for 36 days in 
2017 when 18,436 persons crossed into Gaza, and 16,723 
persons crossed into Egypt. However, this development 
has been impaired by the reduced number of passengers 
allowed through every day (about 350), the obscure criteria 
used for selecting passengers, the long waiting times at the 
crossing, and the multiple security checks and difficulties 
incurred by passengers on the road to Cairo and back to 
Gaza. 
During May, July, August and October, Kerem Shalom 
commercial crossing was intermittently closed due to 
damage generated by participants in the ‘Great March 
of Return’ protests, the closure of the crossing, and by 
restrictions imposed by the Israeli authorities, including 
the ban on import and export of goods except for the 
import of food and medical supplies. Fuel and cooking gas 
were also temporarily banned, generating humanitarian 
concerns as the fuel is the main source of electricity for 
medical facilities in Gaza. 
WEST BANK 
In the West Bank, physical obstacles such as the 
Barrier, checkpoints and administrative requirements, 
particularly permits, continue to restrict Palestinian 
access and movement within the West Bank, including 
into East Jerusalem, areas isolated by the Barrier (the 
“Seam Zone”), “firing zones” and land around or within 
Israeli settlements. A number of restrictions faced by 
organizations remain in place including physical barriers, 
occasional and unannounced closures and confiscation of 
aid. In particular, UN movement continues to be impeded 
at Barrier checkpoints manned by Israeli’s Crossing Points 
Authority (CPA), whereby UN privileges and immunities 
continue to be breached due to demands for vehicle 
searches. During 2018, 97 access incidents affecting 585 
national and international UN personnel were recorded in 
the West Bank. 

21 
PART I: HUMANITARIAN ACCESS 
CLUSTER 
RESPONSE PLANS 
Protection 
Water, Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH) 
Health and Nutrition 
Food Security 
Education 
Shelter and Non-Food Items (NFIs) 
Coordination and Support Services (CSS) 

PART II: SUMMARY OF CLUS TER RESPONSES 
22 
SUMMARY OF 
CLUSTER RESPONSES 
PROTECTION 
PEOPLE IN NEED 
2M 
PEOPLE TARGETED 
0.3M 
47% FEMALE, 45% CHILDREN 
SUPPORTS STRATEGIC 
OBJECTIVES: 
1 
FUNDING REQUIRED 
$36M 
PARTNERS INCLUDED 
32 
WATER, SANITATION AND HYGIENE 
PEOPLE IN NEED 
1.9M 
PEOPLE Targeted 
1M 
49% FEMALE, 38% CHILDREN 
SUPPORTS STRATEGIC 
OBJECTIVES: 
123 
FUNDING REQUIRED 
$29M 
PARTNERS INCLUDED 
19 
RESPONSIVE 
ACTIVITIES 
$21.8M 
REMEDIAL 
ACTIVITIES 
$12.2M 
ENVIRONMENT-BUILDING 
$1.8M 
••Case management 
••Psychosocial support 
••Legal counselling and 
representation 
••ERW clearance 
••GBV referrals 
••Training on mental health and 
psychosocial support 
••Emergency preparedness training 
••ERW risk education sessions 
••Awareness raising on accessing 
legal aid 
••Mental health and psychosocial 
support for adults and youth 
••Strengthened stakeholders’ 
capacities 
••Awareness raising for persons at 
risk of GBV 
RESPONSIVE 
ACTIVITIES 
$18.1M 
REMEDIAL 
ACTIVITIES 
$9.2M 
ENVIRONMENT-BUILDING 
$2.1M 
••WASH services to the 
unconnected 
••Operational interventions for 
service providers 
••Responses to demolitions, other 
man-made and natural disasters 
••Household water treatment 
••WASH services in schools and 
other key institutions 
••WASH service to the underserved 
••Household water treatment 
••Hygiene promotion/awareness 
Sanitation facilities (open 
defecation areas) 
••Capacity of service providers 
••Operation and maintenance 
provision of spare parts 
••Strengthening governance 
••Development of WASH emergency 
preparedness and response plans 
••Knowledge management

PART II: SUMMARY OF CLUS TER RESPONSES 
23 
HEALTH AND NUTRITION 
PEOPLE IN NEED 
1.2M 
PEOPLE TARGETED 
0.9M 
49% FEMALE, 38% CHILDREN 
SUPPORTS STRATEGIC 
OBJECTIVES: 
12 
FUNDING REQUIRED 
$32M 
PARTNERS INCLUDED 
21 
FOOD SECURITY 
PEOPLE IN NEED 
1.7M 
PEOPLE TARGETED 
1.4M 
49% FEMALE, 47% CHILDREN 
SUPPORTS STRATEGIC 
OBJECTIVES: 
13 
FUNDING REQUIRED 
$206M 
PARTNERS INCLUDED 
25 
RESPONSIVE 
ACTIVITIES 
$23M 
REMEDIAL 
ACTIVITIES 
$4.4M 
ENVIRONMENT-BUILDING 
$4.1M 
••Life-saving health interventions 
for trauma patients 
••Essential health services to the 
most vulnerable 
••Monitoring and documentation of 
violations 
••Advocacy for the universal 
access to life-sustaining health 
interventions to the most 
vulnerable groups 
••Strengthening the health system 
through provision of humanitarian 
interventions, preparedness and 
resilience building 
RESPONSIVE 
ACTIVITIES 
$188.2M 
REMEDIAL 
ACTIVITIES 
$5.4M 
ENVIRONMENT-BUILDING
$7M 
••Food distribution or vouchers 
••Essential food production inputs 
and repair of critical assets for 
farmers, herders and fishers 
••Renewable energy sources 
••Cash-based support 
•• Immediate response to pest and 
animal diseases endangering 
livelihood and health 
••Access to adequate food 
production, safety and nutrition 
services 
••Emergency preparedness 
capacities of relevant national 
authorities 
••Awareness sessions (nonagricultural 
technical trainings) 
••Preparedness capacities of 
vulnerable farmers, herders and 
fishers 
••Re/establishment of sustainable 
small-scale food production 
systems with special focus on 
female-headed households 
••Outreach and quality of essential 
agricultural support services 
towards increased resilience 
••Promotion of local food production 
••Coordination among FSS partners

PART II: SUMMARY OF CLUS TER RESPONSES 
24 
EDUCATION 
PEOPLE IN NEED 
0.5M 
PEOPLE TARGETED 
0.3M 
49% FEMALE 
SUPPORTS STRATEGIC 
OBJECTIVES: 
123 
FUNDING REQUIRED 
$15M 
PARTNERS INCLUDED 
19 
SHELTER AND NON-FOOD ITEMS 
PEOPLE IN NEED 
0.3M 
PEOPLE TARGETED 
85K 
45% FEMALE, 50% CHILDREN 
SUPPORTS STRATEGIC 
OBJECTIVES: 
23 
FUNDING REQUIRED 
$14M 
PARTNERS INCLUDED 
14 
RESPONSIVE 
ACTIVITIES 
$7.3M 
REMEDIAL 
ACTIVITIES 
$5.6M 
ENVIRONMENT-BUILDING 
$2.4M 
••Protective presence and 
protective transportation for 
children in the most vulnerable 
areas 
••Emergency education supplies 
to vulnerable, and underserved 
students and teachers 
••School-based psychosocial 
support to school staff and 
students affected by the 
education-related 
••Provision of remedial education to 
vulnerable school aged children 
••Structured preparedness packages 
and post emergency responses 
••Supporting conflict affected school 
CwDs with assistive devices, 
appropriate transportation, 
specialized learning materials, 
or adaptations to school 
infrastructure 
••Essential and basic emergency 
rehabilitation to schools to ensure 
school environments are safe for 
students 
••Reporting, documentation, 
advocacy and communication 
(including dialogue with national 
and international authorities, and 
media outreach) on educationrelated 
violations 
RESPONSIVE 
ACTIVITIES 
$3.2M 
REMEDIAL 
ACTIVITIES 
$6.3M 
ENVIRONMENT-BUILDING 
$4.8M 
•• Immediate solutions for 
vulnerable displaced people 
living in collective centres, host 
families/relatives or substandard 
rented accommodation 
••Protection of vulnerable people 
from natural (harsh weather 
conditions /summarization / 
winterization) or manmade 
disasters 
••Shelter repair and rehabilitation 
activities (in kind and cash) 
••Adequate functionality of essential 
shelter elements 
••Agency stockpiling and prepositioning 
••Upgrading of DES community 
capacity building and awareness 
raising

PART II: SUMMARY OF CLUS TER RESPONSES 
25 
COORDINATION AND SUPPORT SERVICES 
FUNDING REQUIRED 
$18M 
PARTNERS INCLUDED 
10 
SUPPORTS STRATEGIC 
OBJECTIVES: 
123 
RESPONSIVE 
ACTIVITIES 
REMEDIAL 
ACTIVITIES 
PROTRACTED/RESILIENCE 
BUILDING ACTIVITIES 
••oPt Humanitarian Fund 
allocations 
••Regular joint HRP monitoring 
and evaluation products 
••Updated strategic humanitarian 
response at all levels and 
sectors, before the end of 2019 
••Full national and international 
NGO engagement in coordinated 
response activities 
•• Inter-sectoral humanitarian 
needs assessments 
••Coordination meetings at country 
and operational levels 
••Gender mainstreaming, protection 
mainstreaming and community 
engagement throughout the HPC 
process 
•• IM products to inform decisionmaking 
and planning 
••Common decentralized information 
systems/platforms and common 
operational datasets and functional 
information 
••Emergency response readiness 
••Updated multi-year strategic plan, 
as required, before the end of 2019 
••Joint or coordinated advocacy 
events on humanitarian issues of 
concern 
••Provision of briefings on 
humanitarian principles and/ 
or the protection crisis driving 
humanitarian needs in the oPt

26 
PART II: PROTECTION 
PROTECTION 
REQUIREMENTS (US$) 
36M 
PEOPLE TARGETED 
0.3M 
# OF PARTNERS 
32 
CONTACT 
Connie Pedersen 
Protection Cluster 
Coordinator 
cpedersen@ohchr.org 
BREAKDOWN OF PEOPLE IN NEED AND TARGETED BY STATUS, SEX AND AGE 
UNRWA 
Gaza West Bank Total UNRWA 
Gaza 
UNRWA 
West 
Bank 
858,030 
196,000 112,420 99,575 99,575 
1,101,589 
PEOPLE IN NEED 
PEOPLE TARGETED 
FINANCIAL 
REQUIREMENTS 
% female % children, 
adult, 
elderly* 
BY STATUS BY SEX & AGE 
*Children (<18 years old), adult 
$36M (18-59 years), elderly (>59 years) 
49% 
49% 
45% 50% 5% 
45% 50% 5% 
STRATEGY 
The aim of the Protection Cluster is to foster increased 
respect for IHL and IHRL and accountability for possible 
violations, while ensuring that vulnerable Palestinians have 
access to protection (and other multi-sectoral) services 
that prevent and mitigate the effects of the occupation and 
conflict-related violence. 
RESPONSE APPROACH 
The Protection Cluster will achieve this aim through the 
monitoring and documentation of violations, particularly 
aimed at increasing accountability and informing advocacy 
with the purpose of preventing further violations; rightsbased 
advocacy with duty bearers, including third states; 
a protective presence for communities at risk of settler 
violence and displacement; legal aid services; inclusive 
multi-sectoral responses to gender-based violence 
(GBV) survivors, including economic enablement; child 
protection services, including individual case management; 
mental health and psychosocial services (MHPSS) for 
adults and youth; and explosive remnant of war (ERW) 
risk mitigation and education responses. 
PEOPLE TARGETED AND GEOGRAPHICAL SCOPE 
In 2019 the Protection Cluster will target 350,000 
Palestinians identified as affected by conflict-related 
violations and protection risks, including conflict-related 
violence; risk of forcible transfer; collective punishment 
and restrictions on freedom of movement; grave violations 
against children; settler violence; and attacks on human 
rights defenders and organizations. 
In the Gaza Strip, the most vulnerable are individuals and 
families affected by the use of force by Israeli Security 
Forces in the context of the “Great March of Return”; 
those who live in close proximity to or work in the ARAs; 
those a.ected by freedom of movement restrictions, 
including medical patients; vulnerable female-headed 
households, including widows and divorced women in 
need of legal support and court representation to obtain 
their entitlements; and the most vulnerable households 
and groups displaced or at risk of displacement, with 
a focus on IDPs, families at risk of eviction and femaleheaded 
households; GBV survivors, as well as women, 
children and persons with disabilities at risk of GBV who 
lack information and access to appropriate services; adults, 
adolescents and children in need of case management and 
protection services; individuals, particularly children and 
adolescents in the ARA and near military training sites, 
who face risks related to ERW; and vulnerable refugees 
from the region, who lack documentation and face 
challenges in accessing humanitarian assistance. 
In the West Bank, the most vulnerable are people living 
in Area C, Hebron (H2) and East Jerusalem. This includes 
PEOPLE IN NEED 
2M

PART II: PROTECTION 
27 
Palestinians at risk of forcible transfer, particularly in 
communities vulnerable to a coercive environment, 
including those at risk of forced eviction, demolition and 
destruction of property, and those targeted for relocation 
or for revocation of residency rights by the Israeli 
authorities; communities affected by settler violence 
and harassment and settlement-related restrictions on 
movement and access to land; people, especially children, 
who are particularly vulnerable to violence, arrest and 
detention and violations by Israeli security forces; and 
refugee camps most affected by violence in the context of 
Israeli security operations. 
Throughout the oPt, children who are at risk of resorting 
to negative coping mechanisms or being the victims of 
harmful practices are particularly targeted for protection 
interventions, notably children dropping out of schools, 
and children involved in labour. 
CRITERIA USED TO PRIORITIZE INTERVENTIONS 
Interventions prioritize emergency responses to address 
the immediate needs of the most vulnerable groups of the 
Palestinian population, defined by the Protection Cluster 
as those directly affected by conflict-related violations 
and protection risks. In addition, the Protection Cluster 
prioritizes projects that incorporate multi-sectoral 
partnerships aimed at achieving protection outcomes. 
Finally, strict technical standards are applied for acceptance 
of projects, based on proven technical capacity and track 
record. 
PRIORITY RESPONSE INTERVENTIONS 
RESPONSIVE 
Definition: Activities that prevent and stop violations 
or abuses and/or alleviate immediate needs/effects 
of violations. 
Activities: 
nnMonitoring and documentation of violations and 
related trends, focused on IHL and IHRL violations and 
conflict-related violence. 
nnMonitoring and documentation of grave violations 
against children. 
nnProtective presence and accompaniment of individuals 
in vulnerable communities in the West Bank. 
nnProvision of emergency child protection responses, 
including case management, psychosocial support and 
programmes aimed at supporting vulnerable children 
and families affected by conflict related violence and 
violations. 
nnProvision of legal aid (legal counselling and 
representation) to children affected by grave violations 
or ill treatment. 
nnERW clearance. 
nnLegal aid to secure freedom of movement for patients in 
need of medical care outside Gaza. 
nnLegal aid to most vulnerable HH/groups displaced, or at 
risk of displacement (Housing, Land, Property rights). 
nnLegal assistance for Human Rights Defenders. 
nnMulti-sectoral GBV Responses: 
••Mental health and psychosocial services. 
••Emergency health care. 
••Legal aid (individual counselling and representation). 
••Economic enablement. 
••Shelter or other temporary protection. 
••Dignity kits (Remedial and Responsive). 
••Support referrals. 
REMEDIAL 
Definition: Priority activities that go beyond immediate 
response towards addressing time-sensitive or high 
impact underlying issues; advancing the top priority 
resilience needs; additional priority/time sensitive 
activities that support affected people or prevent 
secondary abuses or risks. 
Activities: 
nnAdvocacy initiatives that address protection concerns, 
prevent violations or enhance accountability for 
violations of IHL and IHRL by all duty bearers 
(Responsive and Remedial). 
nnAwareness-raising on protective mechanisms for 
communities at risk of settler violence. 
nnChild Protection workers trained on the guidelines of 
mental health and psychosocial support. 
nnProvision of MHPSS for adults and youth.

28 
PART II: PROTECTION 
nnConflict preparedness and protection (Emergency 
preparedness training). 
nnCommunity-based ERW risk education sessions. 
nnERW risk assessment support to Reconstruction / 
humanitarian projects. 
nnLegal representation for individual victims of IHL/ 
IHRL violations – accountability. 
nnAwareness raising on accessing legal aid in the context 
of IHL/IHRL violations, freedom of movement and 
displacement. 
nnAwareness raising for persons at risk of GBV. 
nnAwareness raising for humanitarian actors (non-GBV 
specialist). 
ENVIRONMENT-BUILDING 
Definition: Activities that address critical gaps in the 
system or context which result in widespread need: 
System-wide activities and/or are those linked to the 
protracted nature of the crisis, which if addressed 
would decrease the need for the responsive activities 
listed above. 
Activities that contribute to an environment that 
encourages authorities to respect their obligations 
and the rights of individuals; change in attitudes, 
policies, values, beliefs; address underlying causes 
of humanitarian vulnerabilities (but only where the 
solution remains humanitarian). 
Activities: 
nnPublic interest litigation to challenge and change 
policies and practices causing displacement, restrictions 
of freedom of movement, IHL and IHRL violations, 
accountability (environment building) 
nnStrengthening stakeholders’ capacities to create 
sustainable legal aid structures and responses to the 
various sector problems and challenges. 
nnAwareness raising for GBV service providers. 
EXCLUDED ACTIVITIES, GROUPS AND/OR AREAS 
OF RESPONSE; LIKELY IMPACT/CONSEQUENCES; 
AND ACTIONS NEEDED BY OTHER ACTORS 
The Protection Cluster recognizes the central role of 
national duty bearers as well as development actors in 
reducing humanitarian needs over the time, particularly 
for the interventions below excluded from the 2019 HRP. 
nnInterventions addressing root causes of societal 
vulnerabilities, such as social norms. Interventions 
to bolster long-term child protection systems are not 
included, unless directly linked to the ongoing conflict. 
nnInterventions to strengthen the national GBV system 
in the oPt. Their exclusion compromises the quality 
of services, which can lead to higher distress for GBV 
survivors, and in the worst case can lead to death 
(suicide or killings). Development interventions will 
be required to establish and sustain the national GBV 
referral system and provide medium and long term 
support and economic enablement to GBV survivors. 
nnTrainings for duty-bearers and humanitarian actors 
on IHL/IHRL violations, housing, land and property 
(HLP) rights and tenure security, with specific focus on 
women’s entitlements. The expected impacts include 
reduced mainstreaming of protection principles and 
reduced sustainability of humanitarian interventions. A 
particular concern is the absence of capacity on women’s 
entitlements in the context of tenure security, with an 
impact on access to justice, economic independence, and 
reduced sustainability of humanitarian interventions in 
the context of HLP rights. 
INTER-SECTORAL LINKAGES 
To enhance protection outcomes and impact, the 
Protection Cluster will provide technical support and 
guidance to other clusters/sectors to mainstream protection 
in their interventions. This will contribute to intercluster 
operations that address protection vulnerabilities, 
including food insecurity, gender, displacement and 
disabilities. Specific protection mainstreaming activities 

PART II: PROTECTION 
29 
planned in 2019 include GBV awareness, detection 
and referral training for frontline humanitarian staff 
and capacity building on ensuring accountability to 
communities. 
Inter-cluster/sector linkages include: support to the 
Education Cluster on child protection mechanisms in 
schools, including ERW risk education; cross sectoral 
emergency case management interventions to reach 
seriously injured children in hospitals, and highly vulnerable 
and at-risk children through schools; collaboration 
and joint programming with the Education Cluster to 
systematically address child drop-out and child labour and 
ensure that legal aid responses are available to support 
schools vulnerable to conflict related violations; support 
to Shelter, WASH and NFI operations via the provision 
of legal counselling and representation in the West Bank; 
ensuring security of tenure for vulnerable groups; linkages 
with the Health Cluster to strengthen gender sensitivity 
and support to GBV survivors, as well as ERW victim 
assistance. Finally, ERW removal interventions will 
be carried out in support of humanitarian interventions 
across sectors. 
The Protection Cluster will continue to support the HCT to 
strengthen the centrality of protection and the integration 
of human rights and accountability in all aspects of the 
HCT’s policies and operations. Similarly, it will continue 
to support and work in close coordination with the HCT 
Advocacy Working Group. 
MAINSTREAMING: PROTECTION, GENDER, AND 
COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT 
In 2019, Protection Cluster projects will contribute 
towards gender equality and gender sensitive programming 
by identifying and analysing the different needs and 
circumstances of women, girls, boys and men, the elderly, 
and persons with disabilities (PwD) within affected groups 
and sub-groups, through participatory methods for sex, age 
and geographically-disaggregated data collection. Priority 
responses and target indicators will then be built, with 
the direct involvement of beneficiaries through effective 
community engagement. All Protection Cluster projects 
will involve rights-holders in the needs assessment, 
design of activities and feedback mechanisms. To ensure 
accountability, beneficiaries will also be actively engaged 
in the regular monitoring of results to assess the reach 
and quality of the responses, and identify any potential 
unintended negative impact for review. “Do no harm” 
will be a cross-cutting guiding principle in the cluster’s 
response. 

30 
PART II: WATER, SANITATION AND HYG IENE (WASH) 
STRATEGY 
The following WASH activities have been prioritized 
for 2019: responsive activities through WASH service 
provisions to the unconnected; operational interventions 
for service providers to maintain existing levels of 
essential WASH services; response to demolitions, other 
man-made and natural disasters as well as household 
water treatment. Remedial activities will focus on the 
provision of WASH services in health facilities, schools 
and other key institutions; provision of WASH services 
to the underserved; hygiene promotion/awareness 
and sanitation facilities (especially in open defecation 
areas). Protracted/Environment Building activities will 
focus on strengthening the capacity of WASH service 
providers; improving operation and maintenance (O&M); 
strengthening governance and WASH knowledge 
management. The WASH Cluster will also strengthen the 
coordination, advocacy and emergency preparedness of 
the WASH sector, while enhancing gender and protection 
in WASH humanitarian actions. 
RESPONSE APPROACH 
To Achieve this, the cluster will: 
1 Provide targeted communities and key institutions 
such as schools, early childhood development centres 
and healthcare facilities with access to safe drinking 
water services, promoting more sustainable solutions 
for safe water and sanitation services to reduce aid 
dependency. The Cluster will also provide adequate 
sanitation services jointly with hygiene promotion by, 
inter alia, providing and/or rehabilitating sanitation 
facilities for households, as well as in key education 
and social service institutions. In addition, WASH 
partners in Gaza will provide capacity enhancement 
for WASH service providers to maintain existing levels 
of essential services, through traditional or alternative 
energy sources to run critical WASH facilities. In the 
West Bank, partners will respond to demolitions. 
2 Continue to build the capacity of service providers 
to maintain existing levels of essential services; 
supply essential items for ongoing maintenance 
and operation; support them to respond to, and to 
mitigate, emergencies. 
3 Continue to build capacity for humanitarian 
WASH coordination at national and sub-national 
levels through providing dedicated information 
management and coordination support.12 
PEOPLE TARGETED AND GEOGRAPHICAL SCOPE 
In 2019, the WASH Cluster will target 1.07 million 
Palestinians, 0.95 million in Gaza and 0.12 in the West 
Bank. In the Gaza the Cluster will target vulnerable people 
who are exposed to one or more of the following: affected 
by the blockade and energy crisis; lacking access to safe 
WATER, SANITATION AND HYGIENE (WASH) 
BREAKDOWN CONTACTS OF PEOPLE IN NEED AND TARGETED BY STATUS, SEX AND AGE 
Mageda Alawneh 
WASH Coordinator/West Bank- 
Palestinian Water Authority 
malawneh@msn.com 
mag_alawneh@yahoo.com 
Yasser Nassar 
WASH Cluster Coordinator (Gaza) 
ynassar@unicef.org 
UNRWA 
Gaza West Bank Total UNRWA 
Gaza 
UNRWA 
West 
Bank 
1,606,087 294,548 
949,384 121,900 589,745 
PEOPLE IN NEED 
PEOPLE TARGETED 
FINANCIAL 
REQUIREMENTS 
% female % children, 
adult, 
elderly* 
BY STATUS BY SEX & AGE 
*Children (<18 years old), adult (18-59 years), elderly (>59 years) 
** UNRWA will provide fuel for solid waste removal and water and sanitation facilities in Gaza and the total number of people who will 
benefit from this service includes direct and indirect beneficiaries. However, it was decided not to include this number into the WASH 
calculation for their total people targeted since this would over-inflate the overall number of people targeted for the WASH cluster. 
$29M
REQUIREMENTS (US$) 
29M 
PEOPLE TARGETED 
1M 
# OF PARTNERS 
19 
PEOPLE IN NEED 
1.9M

PART II: WATER, SANITATION AND HYG IENE (WASH) 
31 
drinking water; at risk of winter flooding; exposed to 
environmental health risks; in the West Bank the Cluster 
will target communities with the least access to services 
(unserved and underserved communities); Area C, affected 
by poor service provisions; communities affected by 
demolitions and settler violence. The Cluster will focus its 
response on vulnerable populations with disabilities, the 
elderly, widows, children, and female-headed households. 
In the Gaza Strip, the WASH Cluster will focus its 
interventions in proximity to the Access Restricted Areas 
(ARAs) and flood-prone areas, areas unconnected by 
WASH services and areas exposed to public/environmental 
health risks i.e. the Gaza shoreline. 
In the West Bank, the WASH Cluster will focus its 
interventions in Area C, including areas affected by the 
Barrier; Israeli restrictions; settlements; demolition orders; 
areas of Areas A and B that serve Area C, East Jerusalem, 
and H2 in Hebron. 
CRITERIA USED TO PRIORITIZE INTERVENTIONS 
nnLifesaving interventions in Area C of the West Bank, 
H2 in Hebron, and Gaza (in particular in the ARAs). 
nnInterventions considered as “responsive”; including 
WASH service provisions to the unconnected; 
supporting service providers to maintain existing levels 
of essential WASH services; response to demolitions, 
other man-made and natural disasters; supporting 
household water treatment in the most vulnerable 
communities; strengthening of coordination, advocacy 
and emergency preparedness; enhancing of gender and 
protection in WASH humanitarian actions. 
PRIORITY RESPONSE INTERVENTIONS 
RESPONSIVE 
Definition: Lifesaving WASH interventions and 
maintaining essential WASH services in the most 
vulnerable communities, directly exposed to 
waterborne diseases. In Gaza 
Activities: WASH service provisions to the unconnected; 
supporting service providers to maintain existing levels 
of essential WASH services; response to demolitions, 
other man-made and natural disasters; household water 
treatment in the most vulnerable communities. 
REMEDIAL 
Definition: WASH response to the needs of people 
under public health risk and deteriorated WASH living 
conditions. 
Activities: Provision of WASH services in health facilities, 
schools and other key institutions; WASH service 
provisions to the underserved; hygiene promotion/ 
awareness and sanitation facilities (including in open 
defecation areas). 
ENVIRONMENT-BUILDING 
Definition: To strengthen national WASH governance 
systems in terms of accountability, advocacy, 
evidence-based planning; to reduce threats and cope 
with emergencies/ shocks. 
Activities: Capacity-building of WASH service providers; 
improve operation and maintenance; strengthen 
governance of the sector and knowledge management. 
Strengthening coordination, advocacy and emergency 
preparedness and enhancing gender and protection. 
EXCLUDED ACTIVITIES, GROUPS AND/OR AREAS 
OF RESPONSE; LIKELY IMPACT/CONSEQUENCES; 
AND ACTIONS NEEDED BY OTHER ACTORS 
Support for people to have clean water and adequate 
sanitation has been reduced. In particular, emergency 
preparedness activities for Gaza will be decreased. Efforts 
to ensure that communities in the West Bank can access 
water have also been reduced to target only the most 
underserved and vulnerable communities in Area C, 
instead of a broader range of moderately vulnerable 
communities. 
INTER-SECTORAL LINKAGES 
The WASH Cluster will: 
nnPrioritize the collection of information about WASH 
services in key institutions such as schools etc., in 
coordination with the Health, Education and Protection 
clusters, and will continue working with the Food 
Security Sector and the Shelter Cluster to provide 
comprehensive assistance. 
nnWork further upstream and provide policy, regulatory 
and sector strategy support, in line with the 2014 Water 
Law to strengthen national and sub-national WASH 
related institutions and systems. 
nnFoster increased donor engagement, to strengthen the 

32 
PART II: WATER, SANITATION AND HYG IENE (WASH) 
humanitarian and development continuum and ensure 
that the HRP is included in the National WASH budget, 
strategy and action plans. 
nnEnsure a stronger alignment with other Clusters and 
Cluster partners (cross-sectoral especially with WASH/ 
Health/Education). 
nnEngage with the electricity sector and systems, including 
through advocacy with key stakeholders, to alleviate the 
WASH-energy nexus. 
MAINSTREAMING: PROTECTION, GENDER, AND 
COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT 
In 2019, the WASH Cluster will facilitate the recovery of 
targeted right holders and increase their own capacity for 
protection. This will be achieved by enhancing community 
resilience through increased access to natural resources 
and livelihood opportunities. The highest priority will 
be given to communities most affected by the Gaza 
blockade, Israeli restrictions in Area C, the Barrier, Israeli 
military zones, Israeli settlements, and conflict. All WASH 
activities will include advocacy components that promote 
IHL and IHRL. 
WASH partners will contribute to gender equality and 
gender-sensitive/responsive programming by collecting 
sex and age disaggregated data, conducting a gendered 
analysis, and designing interventions that address 
gender needs, integrate gender considerations and 
include meaningful participation of different vulnerable 
populations (e.g. widows, persons with disabilities, 
adolescent girls, farmers, etc.). The Cluster will continue 
to promote knowledge and use of the new WASH gender 
toolkit. 
Regarding Community Engagement, the Cluster will work 
closely with affected communities, partner governorates, 
area focal points and service providers in Gaza, to involve 
affected communities in the identification of needs and 
the design and implementation of interventions; and 
using participatory approaches to evaluate and to assuring 
feedback/complaint mechanisms and WASH partners 
emergency response and preparedness interventions. 

PART II: Food Securit y 
33 
UNRWA 
Gaza West Bank Total UNRWA 
Gaza 
UNRWA 
West 
Bank 
1,024,000 1,013,093 18,182 
1,357,000 
1,300,000 108,700 
PEOPLE IN NEED 
PEOPLE TARGETED 
FINANCIAL 
REQUIREMENTS 
% female % children, 
adult, 
elderly** 
BY STATUS BY SEX & AGE 
**Children (<18 years old), adult 
$206M (18-59 years), elderly (>59 years) 
BREAKDOWN OF PEOPLE IN NEED AND TARGETED BY STATUS, SEX AND AGE 
CONTACT BREAKDOWN OF PEOPLE IN NEED AND TARGETED BY STATUS, SEX AND AGE 
Marco Ferloni 
Food Security Sector coordinator 
marco.ferloni@foodsecuritycluster.net 
The FSS has identified 1.4 million people targeted as an estimation from targets of major projects. Target per governorate is also an estimation based on the 
same rationale, as FSS partners respond to food insecurity using a variety of modalities throughout the country. 
STRATEGY 
The aim of the Food Security Sector is to improve the food 
security of needy and vulnerable Palestinians, including 
refugees and IDPs, by ensuring immediate direct access 
to food and protecting/restoring their livelihoods and 
enhancing resilience. 
RESPONSE STRATEGY 
To achieve this, the Food Security Cluster will adapt 
a multi-pronged approach, tailored according to 
beneficiaries’ status, to maximise service provision and 
decrease dependency: 
1 Protecting vulnerable household livelihoods by 
restoring their productive capacity, through the 
rehabilitation and provision of basic assets; the 
facilitation of access of essential inputs and services 
to advance the quality and sustainability of local 
production; the promotion of income-generating 
activities; and the introduction of more efficient and 
sustainable technologies (e.g.: renewable energy). 
2 Addressing the essential needs of households with 
limited access to nutritious and adequate food, while 
reinforcing the economy and food production by 
sourcing food locally and through other ad-hoc cash 
transfer mechanisms. 
3 Assisting needy households through cash transfers, 
including cash-for-work and unconditional/ 
unrestricted cash assistance. 
4 Improving coordination among FSS partners, 
including line ministries at central and local level, 
and across other sectors as required; enhancing 
information gathering and sharing for preparedness, 
advocacy and improved implementation. 
PEOPLE TARGETED AND GEOGRAPHICAL SCOPE 
In 2019, the FSS will target 1.4 million of the 1.7 million 
Palestinians identified as food insecure and in need of 
assistance, as estimated by the SEFSec survey 2018 (PCBS). 
This FSS targeted figure has been estimated on the basis of 
partners’ planned interventions, and includes 1,013,093 
refugees in Gaza and 18,182 refugees in West Bank in 
need of aid; 377,425 non-refugee Palestinians across the 
oPt; and 160,000 people are targeted for humanitarian 
agriculture-based livelihood assistance. Households in the 
West Bank affected by the demolition or confiscation of 
productive assets are also targeted.13 
FOOD SECURITY 
REQUIREMENTS (US$) 
206M 
PEOPLE TARGETED 
1.4M 
# OF PARTNERS 
25 
PEOPLE IN NEED 
1.7M

34 
PART II: Food Securit y 
While having a broad geographical range, in the West 
Bank, activities will focus on Area C and East Jerusalem, 
particularly where agricultural-dependent communities 
risk losing their livelihoods through settler violence, 
demolitions, confiscation of productive assets and Israeli 
relocation plans. In Gaza, activities will focus on the ARA 
by land and sea. 
CRITERIA USED TO PRIORITIZE INTERVENTIONS 
Given the high level of food insecurity and the difficult 
funding environment, the FSS facilitated a participatory 
process to identify the most urgent priorities, especially 
in the area of livelihoods support, which presents a wide 
range of urgent needs to be addressed and a varieties of 
possible responses. HRP projects are therefore vetted 
against a short-list of top-priority responses under the 
protection of livelihood component, in agreement with the 
line ministries and with the endorsement of FSS partners. 
Interventions will target beneficiaries with the highest 
level of vulnerability and unmet needs. This includes the 
adoption of the Proxy Means Test Formula (PMTF) and 
similar instruments. 
PRIORITY RESPONSE INTERVENTIONS 
RESPONSIVE 
Definition: 
••Activities to stop shocks and or violations of the 
right to access adequate food, and/or mitigate the 
effects of these violations and shocks. 
••Activities that provide immediate protection for 
livelihoods and improvement of food security status 
of vulnerable and/or affected people. 
••Responsive actions are urgent and impact is 
immediate. 
Activities: 
nnMeeting basic food needs of families lacking access to 
food, while protecting local food production and income 
generation through: food distribution or vouchers; 
provision of essential food production inputs, and 
repair of critical assets for farmers, herders and fishers. 
nnCash-based support. 
nnImmediate response to pest and animal 
diseases that endanger livelihood and health. 
REMEDIAL 
Definition: Priority activities that go beyond immediate 
response towards addressing time-sensitive or herlying 
issues. 
Activities that focus on medium-term livelihood 
protection, and ensure adequate food security 
subsequent to violations or shocks, including prevention 
of secondary shocks and risks, with particular focuon 
preventing negative copying mechanisms. 
Activities: 
nnEnsure access of consumers and producers to adequate 
food production, safety and nutrition services. 
nnEnhance the emergency preparedness capacities of 
relevant national authorities, including improvement 
and standardization of tools to analyse, prioritize and 
target responses to food security. 
nnAwareness sessions (non-agricultural technical trainings) 
including on food preparation and consumption. 
ENVIRONMENT-BUILDING 
Definition: Activities that address critical gaps which 
result in widespread need. These may be system-wide 
activities and/or linked to the protracted nature of the 
crisis, which if addressed, would decrease the need for 
responsive activities listed above and effect structural 
changes. 
Environment Building activities can contribute to 
changes in attitudes, policies, values, beliefs and 
address the underlying causes of humanitarian 
vulnerabilities. 
Activities: 
nnStrengthening preparedness capacities of vulnerable 
farmers, herders and fishers through in-kind and 
technical support using the Build-Back Better approach 
for increased resilience. Support the re/establishment 
of sustainable small-scale food production systems 
with a special focus on female-headed households, 
including interventions that support women’s role in the 
agricultural sector. 
nnStrengthening the outreach and quality of essential 
agricultural and food safety support services towards 
increased resilience. 
nnSupport to non-agricultural livelihoods 
nnPromotion of local food production, commercialization 
and small-scale processing.

PART II: Food Securit y 
35 
nnImproving coordination among FSS partners, including 
enhancing ownership and leadership in line ministries 
at central and local level, and enhancing information 
sharing for preparedness, advocacy, and improved 
implementation. 
EXCLUDED ACTIVITIES, GROUPS AND/OR AREAS 
OF RESPONSE; LIKELY IMPACT/CONSEQUENCES; 
AND ACTIONS NEEDED BY OTHER ACTORS 
While direct food aid will continue, especially in Gaza, two 
other types of support have been reduced. First, cash for 
work projects, aimed at supporting families to have been 
substantially reduced in Gaza and, to a lesser extent, in the 
West Bank, in part because of budget cuts for UNRWA. 
Livelihood support, such as agricultural support to help 
people be less reliant on external assistance, has also been 
reduced. 
INTER-SECTORAL LINKAGES 
Overall inter-sectoral response is ensured through the 
inter-cluster architecture in place, where beneficiaries are 
supported comprehensively through specialised actions. 
The FSS will work with relevant partners, in particular, 
strengthening of information-sharing with the Health and 
Nutrition Cluster regarding nutrition; with Protection 
and Shelter cluster partners on the demolition response in 
the West Bank and on IDPs in Gaza; with the Protection 
Cluster on interventions to support farmers in the Gaza 
ARA. 
MAINSTREAMING: PROTECTION, GENDER, AND 
COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT 
In 2019 food security interventions will focus on the 
following protection issues. Particularly vulnerable 
communities in Area C struggling to access basic services 
will be supported with livelihood interventions, income 
opportunities and direct access to food. FSS partners will 
support farmers and fisherfolk in the Gaza ARAs. Partners 
will advocate on issues that drive food insecurity, such 
as settler violence in the West Bank and the dual-use 
restrictions for importing materials into Gaza to promote 
increased accountability on the part of respective duty 
bearers. 
FSS partners will prioritize the identification of, and 
response to, gender-based vulnerabilities, to support the 
eroded coping capacities of female-headed households. 
Rural male and female farmers, herders, breeders, fishers 
and urban and peri-urban producers will be supported 
to decrease their aid dependence and promote resilience. 
Community engagement, including Accountability 
to Affected Populations, will be enhanced at the 
project level through consultations at community and 
household levels. This includes assessments, focus group 
discussions, monitoring tools, complaints mechanisms, 
and offering concrete linkages with, and involvement of, 
the beneficiaries, who become active actors in planning 
tailored activities. The FSS will promote improvement of 
knowledge and sharing of best practices on these topics. 
The active participation of local NGOs is a key element 
in keeping strong linkages with affected people, which 
requires increased and continuous financial support. 

36 
PART II: HEALTH AND NUTRITION 
BREAKDOWN OF PEOPLE IN NEED AND TARGETED BY STATUS, SEX AND AGE 
CONTACTS 
Sara Halimah 
National Health Cluster Coordinator 
halimahs@who.int 
Abdelnaser Soboh 
Gaza Health Sub-Cluster Coordinator 
soboha@who.int 
UNRWA 
Gaza West Bank Total UNRWA 
Gaza 
UNRWA 
West 
Bank 
868,382 295,229 
633,089 163,133 140,000 140,000 
PEOPLE IN NEED 
PEOPLE TARGETED 
FINANCIAL 
REQUIREMENTS 
% female % children, 
adult, 
elderly* 
BY STATUS BY SEX & AGE 
*Children (<18 years old), adult 
$32M (18-59 years), elderly (>59 years) 
HEALTH AND NUTRITION 
REQUIREMENTS (US$) 
32M 
PEOPLE TARGETED 
0.9M 
# OF PARTNERS 
21 
STRATEGY 
As the health situation in the oPt deteriorates, the Health 
Cluster aims to scale-up the response to acute health needs 
by ensuring access to critical and lifesaving health services, 
through health service delivery and operationally-focused 
coordination and information, while strengthening health 
preparedness at the facility and community level. 
RESPONSE APPROACH 
Recognizing that resources are shrinking as humanitarian 
need is increasing, the Health Cluster will focus on: 
1 Ensuring that acutely vulnerable groups in the oPt have 
access to essential and lifesaving health services. This 
includes responding to the need for conflict-related 
trauma, from the point of injury to rehabilitation; 
maternal and child health; and providing mental health 
to the most vulnerable across all levels of healthcare, at 
the facility or through community outreach teams. In 
addition, the Cluster will develop a minimum package 
of essential health services for communities that 
require access to primary healthcare, in cooperation 
with the Ministry of Health, and coordinate the 
access of mobile clinics to the most hard-to-reach 
communities in the West Bank. 
2 The protracted conflict, alongside sudden shocks, is 
overwhelming an already overburdened health system. 
The Health Cluster will contribute to preparedness 
measures in health facilities and communities across 
the oPt to respond to death and disability and the 
lack of access for mobile health clinics in the West 
Bank. Critical activities will focus on the capacity 
building of local NGOs and rapid health assessments 
in emergency situations. Preparedness measures to 
mitigate the impact of the energy crisis on patients 
in need of dialysis or in intensive care units, among 
others, will require timely interventions to prevent 
death or disability. 
3 The Health Cluster will enhance health sector 
coordination, health information systems and 
advocacy, with a strong emphasis on health 
protection and increasing access to health services, 
while continuing to hold the relevant authorities to 
account.14 
PEOPLE TARGETED AND GEOGRAPHICAL SCOPE 
In 2019, the Health Cluster will target 1.25 million 
Palestinians. Including 15,000 IDPs, identified as most 
vulnerable and at high risk of morbidity and mortality, 
including women of reproductive age; children, including 
neonates; the elderly; people with disabilities (PwD); and 
non-communicable disease (NCD) patients (including 
mental health patients) that face the risk of death or a severe 
deterioration in their health status. Over 600,000 of these 
are children and approximately 730,000 are women. The 
Cluster target has been set by taking into consideration the 
PEOPLE IN NEED 
1.2M

PART II: HEALTH AND NUTRITION 
37 
existing capacity, accessibility and resource availability of 
the Ministry of Health and health partners. Interventions 
will be focused on key geographical areas, including: the 
whole of Gaza (particularly the ARA) and within the 
West Bank, Area C, H2 of Hebron, the “Seam Zone”, 
communities living behind the Barrier in East Jerusalem, 
and acutely vulnerable people in East Jerusalem who 
cannot access health services. 
CRITERIA USED TO PRIORITIZE INTERVENTIONS 
The Health Cluster will prioritise: 
nnThe provision of comprehensive care for trauma care 
across the trauma pathway, from point of injury to 
rehabilitation across the Gaza Strip. 
nnThe provision of basic primary healthcare services for 
people in hard–to-reach areas. 
nnServices for groups with acute vulnerabilities, such as 
neonatal care services and reproductive healthcare, and 
mental health and psychosocial support. 
nnService provision with a focus on integrated healthcare 
activities within a local/regional network approach, 
particularly within Area C in the West Bank. 
PRIORITY RESPONSE INTERVENTIONS 
RESPONSIVE 
Definitions: Life-saving health interventions for 
trauma patients and access to essential health 
services for the most vulnerable. 
Activities: 
nnScale-up life and limb-saving health services to patients 
suffering from conflict-related injuries through the 
provision of trauma care services across the trauma 
pathway. 
nnRespond to the most vulnerable by ensuring access 
to essential primary healthcare in the West Bank and 
secondary level in Gaza. 
REMEDIAL 
Definition: Life-sustaining health interventions for 
the most vulnerable: children under five; pregnant 
and lactating women (PLW); NCD patients; etc., 
including advocating for universal access to health 
and highlighting violations. 
Activities: 
nnRespond to the needs of vulnerable children under the 
age of five, neonates and pregnant and lactating women 
through life-sustaining interventions at the facility and 
community level, and a Minimal Initial Service Package 
(MISP). 
nnDocument, monitor and advocate for universal health 
coverage and the right to health, including access 
to specialized health services requiring permits, and 
prohibition of attacks on health. 
nnStrengthen health sector coordination and health 
information systems to improve life-saving health 
response for people in need, with an emphasis on 
enhancing protection and increasing access to health. 
ENVIRONMENT-BUILDING 
Definition: Strengthening the health system through 
the provision of humanitarian interventions, 
preparedness and resilience building. 
Activities: 
nnEnhancing preparedness to better deal with sudden 
onset events, such as heightened conflict and disease 
outbreak, through stockpiling, life-saving training, and 
enhanced coordination and communication. 
EXCLUDED ACTIVITIES, GROUPS AND/OR AREAS 
OF RESPONSE; LIKELY IMPACT/CONSEQUENCES; 
AND ACTIONS NEEDED BY OTHER ACTORS 
As resources in the oPt deplete, the Health Cluster 
has re-focused its interventions on key life-saving or 
life-sustaining activities so that only the most acutely 
vulnerable are supported. People with disabilities (PWDs) 
have been identified as a vulnerable group; however, only 
interventions that support PwDs with no alternative 
access to healthcare, or who are suffering from a conflictrelated 
injury, will be prioritized in the HRP. Additionally, 
although drugs and disposables continue to deplete in 
Gaza, impacting non-communicable disease patients, the 
Cluster has prioritized the elderly (60 +) as at highest risk 
of mortality. 
At the same time, local authorities are encouraged to take 
on responsibility for excluded groups, with some success 
already. In the West Bank, to reduce the caseload, the 
cluster has handed over some key vulnerable communities 
to the Palestinian Ministry of Health to be served through 
their local mobile health clinics, However, as access 
challenges remain, the Cluster still considers advocacy a 

38 
PART II: HEALTH AND NUTRITION 
key priority in 2019 for all communities served by MoH 
or NGO mobile health clinics. 
INTER-SECTORAL LINKAGES 
Collaboration with other clusters will continue, 
including with the Protection Cluster to ensure effective 
implementation of projects addressing MHPSS. An 
integrated response to GBV will also be coordinated 
with the Protection Cluster, as GBV encompasses 
protection, psychosocial and medical elements, with the 
Health Cluster focusing more on the medical aspects 
at the facility level. With the WASH Cluster, the 
Health Cluster will ensure a WASH component in the 
assessment and rehabilitation of health facilities; and 
further collaboration on the impact of the energy crisis on 
health at a household level. In addition, joint information, 
education and communication interventions related to 
hygiene behaviours will be coordination between the two 
clusters. 
MAINSTREAMING: PROTECTION, GENDER, AND 
COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT 
In 2019, the Health Cluster will promote the protection 
of patients, health staff and health facilities in accordance 
with IHL and IHRL, by developing improved tools 
for monitoring violations of health-related rights and 
promoting joint advocacy initiatives. The Health Cluster 
will prioritize disability mainstreaming, through field 
monitoring and disaggregation of data on the number of 
PWDs served through each project, and promotion of 
the safety and dignity of affected people during service 
delivery. 
Partners will contribute to gender equality and genderresponsive 
programming by addressing gender-specific 
vulnerabilities faced by men, women, girls and boys. 
Rapid and standard assessments will collect, analyse, and 
disaggregate data by gender and by age group. Gender will 
also be mainstreamed by working with other clusters to 
ensure that the clinical management of GBV is improved, 
and that sanitation facilities within health facilities meet 
the specific needs of women and PWDS. 
Community engagement and accountability to affected 
populations will be enhanced by involving communities 
and their representatives at all stages of project design, 
implementation, monitoring and evaluation. Target 
right-holders will be consulted during assessment and will 
be actively involved in formulating projects. Channels of 
communication for feedback, complaints and information 
sharing will be established so that assistance is delivered 
in adherence to the principles of “do no harm”. Moreover, 
the Health Custer will prioritize the capacity development 
of local institutional and national partners. To reduce 
its environmental footprint and better manage scarce 
resources, health partners will use solar panels, where 
possible, to overcome electricity shortages in essential 
health facilities. Environmental concerns will also be 
addressed, including the proper disposal of biological 
waste and environmental health control in health facilities.

PART II: EDUCATION 
39 
EDUCATION 
BREAKDOWN CONTACTS OF PEOPLE IN NEED AND TARGETED BY STATUS, SEX AND AGE 
Fadi Baidoun 
Education Officer, UNICEF 
fbaidoun@unicef.org 
Baha Elshatali 
Gaza Sub-Cluster Coordinator 
belshatali@unicef.org 
UNRWA 
Gaza West Bank Total UNRWA 
Gaza 
UNRWA 
West 
Bank 
480,013 39,245 
328,167 28,280 231,192 231,192 
PEOPLE IN NEED 
PEOPLE TARGETED 
FINANCIAL 
REQUIREMENTS 
% female % children, 
adult, 
elderly* 
BY STATUS BY SEX & AGE 
*Children (<18 years old), adult 
(18-59 years), elderly (>59 years) 
$15M 
STRATEGY 
The aim of the Education Cluster is to ensure that the 
most vulnerable students and teachers have safe access to 
inclusive and quality education, while supporting schools 
to be prepared and to respond to education-related 
violations. 
RESPONSE APPROACH 
The Education Cluster will achieve this aim by working 
in close partnership with the Ministry of Education and 
Higher Education (MoEHE) to prepare and respond to 
crises including attacks on schools, risks facing children on 
their way to school, school demolitions and other threats 
to education and protection. 
PEOPLE TARGETED AND GEOGRAPHICAL SCOPE 
In 2018, the Education Cluster will target 356,447 people 
out of 519,258 (480,013 in Gaza and 39,245 in the West 
Bank) identified as in need of education assistance. In Gaza, 
students affected by double and triple shifts; children with 
disabilities and children from the most vulnerable and 
poorest households will be targeted. In the West Bank, 
specific focus will be given to students and teachers who 
are subjec to education-related violations, such as school 
demolitions, confiscation of school equipment, harassment 
or violence on their way to school, and students who 
are under house arrest, injured or ex-detainees. Special 
attention will be paid to children in need of MHPSS and 
remedial education, as a consequence of education-related 
violations. 
In terms of geographic scope, in Gaza, the Cluster’s focus 
is on the most vulnerable schools, including but not 
limited to the Access Restricted Area. In the West Bank, 
the focus is primarily on Area C, Hebron H2, and East 
Jerusalem. Priority locations include areas where students 
have to travel long distances to school; where students 
and teachers have to cross checkpoints, military areas or 
firing zones; areas where there are significant shortages 
of education staff; areas with movement barriers (such as 
Hebron H2); areas where schools are at risk of being used 
as shelter for displaced people during emergencies (such 
as Gaza); or locations where there is a shortage of school 
infrastructure (such as Bedouin areas and Area C). 
CRITERIA USED TO PRIORITIZE INTERVENTIONS 
In West Bank, the Education Cluster and the MoEHE have 
developed a list of the most vulnerable schools, based on 
criteria that include obstacles and other conflict-related 
risks children face on the way to school; Israeli violations 
and attacks on schools; and proximity to Israeli settlements. 
In addition, the Education Cluster has prioritized 
REQUIREMENTS (US$) 
15M 
PEOPLE TARGETED 
0.3M 
# OF PARTNERS 
19 
PEOPLE IN NEED 
0.5M

40 
PART II: EDUCATION 
supporting children at risk of dropout or children out of 
school as a direct result of conflict (ex-detainees, at home 
arrest, injured or disabled, etc.). 
In Gaza, in consultation with cluster partners, the cluster 
has prioritized a pure humanitarian focus based on criteria 
that includes schools’ location in the Access Restricted 
Area; Children in need of MHPSS interventions children 
with disabilities (CwD) in need of assistive hearing devices 
and visual aids); children at risk of drop-out, and IDP 
children. 
PRIORITY RESPONSE INTERVENTIONS 
RESPONSIVE 
Definition: any activity undertaken to manage and/ 
or mitigate the effects of on-going education-related 
violations and on children, teachers, education 
facilities and the education process. 
Activities: 
nnEnsuring safe access to schools for children in the most 
vulnerable areas through a protective presence and 
protective transportation. 
nnProvision of emergency education supplies, (including 
caravans, stationary, student kits, teaching supplies, 
uniforms, solar systems etc.) to vulnerable, and 
underserved students and teachers 
nnProvision of school-based psychosocial support to 
school staff and students affected by education-related 
violations. 
REMEDIAL 
Definition: any activity aimed at supporting quality 
education in targeted schools and communities, and 
ensuring a safe environment for students and staff. 
Activities: 
nnProvision of remedial education to vulnerable schoolaged 
children (students suffering from home arrest, 
injury or ex-detainees, CwDs, IDP children, children at 
risk of dropout). 
nnSupporting the most vulnerable schools in dealing with 
emergencies, through structured preparedness packages 
and post emergency responses. 
nnSupporting conflict-affected school and CwDs 
with assistive devices, appropriate transportation, 
specialized learning materials, or adaptations to school 
infrastructure. 
Provision of essential and basic emergency 
rehabilitation to ensure a safe school environment. 
ENVIRONMENT-BUILDING 
Definition: any activity aimed at creating and/ 
or consolidating an environment conducive 
to a full respect for the right of Palestinian 
children to education and protection, including 
advocating for protecting education from attacks. 
Activities: 
nnStrengthening reporting, documentation, advocacy 
and communication (including dialogue with national 
and international authorities, and media outreach) on 
education-related violations. 
EXCLUDED ACTIVITIES, GROUPS AND/OR AREAS 
OF RESPONSE; LIKELY IMPACT/CONSEQUENCES; 
AND ACTIONS NEEDED BY OTHER ACTORS 
As part of the prioritization exercise undertaken this year, 
the Education Cluster narrowed the scope of its response 
by removing legal support and CAAC-reporting related 
activities from the response framework, as both activities 
can be covered through other clusters and mechanisms. 
No negative consequences of this change are foreseen. 
Transfer of the legal portfolio to the Protection Cluster 
and Legal Task Force will consolidate that work under one 
umbrella. In addition, the Cluster will no longer prioritize 
major school reconstruction or renovations, but focus 
only on basic infrastructure needs preventing children’s 
access to a safe school environment. 
The scope of remedial education work, previously extended 
to all low-achieving children, will now be narrowed to 
include only children in house arrest in Jerusalem, CwDs, 
IDP children, and children at risk of dropout in Gaza. 
The Cluster has also excluded activities related to national 
contingency planning as these should form part of 
development interventions. The risk is that these activities 
may not be picked up by the development actors and may 
fall through the humanitarian-development nexus. 
In terms of geographical focus, the Cluster has excluded 
several schools in Area C and East Jerusalem that are 
classified as low risk in the School Vulnerability Analysis. 
To ensure that the needs of the excluded schools and 
children are met, the Cluster has identified several other 
mitigating measures: 
nnClose information sharing, advocacy and coordination 
with donors to ensure that the interventions excluded 
from the HRP have sufficient funding through other 
channels.

PART II: EDUCATION 
41 
nnAdvocacy with MOEHE on the need to ensure remedial 
education and emergency preparedness as part of system 
strengthening and teacher training. 
nnRegular follow up and information exchange with the 
Protection Cluster and the Legal Taskforce on legal 
interventions related to education issues. 
nnRegular follow up and information exchange with the 
WASH Cluster on WASH interventions in targeted 
schools. 
INTER-SECTORAL LINKAGES 
The 2019 Education response is built around different 
inter-sectoral linkages. Schools are identified across clusters 
as hubs for multi-sectoral interventions, so that partners 
can support children with a more holistic response. The 
linkage with the Protection Cluster includes working 
within schools to provide child protection referrals and 
school-based psychosocial support to students, teachers 
and parents. Legal aid and protection advocacy are also 
done through inter-cluster coordination. 
Activities with WASH include the construction of 
gender-segregated school toilets, hygiene promotion 
sessions to students, rehabilitation of water and sanitation 
infrastructure in schools, and the provision of Menstrual 
Hygiene Management (MHM) products to female 
students. Collaboration with the Health Cluster ensures the 
provision of assistive devices for students with disabilities. 
To ensure effective coordination, it has been agreed that 
all school-based interventions should be implemented in 
collaboration with the Education Cluster. 
MAINSTREAMING: PROTECTION, GENDER, AND 
COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT 
The emergency education strategy in oPt is driven by 
protection-sensitive activities, which underpin the 2019 
Education Sector Response. In addition to school-based 
psychosocial support, a protective presence for students 
and teachers, and legal aid and advocacy around protecting 
schools from attacks, the Education Cluster will work with 
the Protection Cluster to link schools with protection 
service providers to address protection needs in the most 
vulnerable schools. 
Gender equality and gender-responsive programming is 
promoted through conducting gender analysis. Projects 
will address gender discrimination in terms of access to 
education, as well as the different risks that boys and girls 
face on their way to, from and inside school. Partners will 
ensure equal participation of boys and girls in student 
clubs, and ensure that school WASH facilities are gender 
segregated. 
Community engagement will be enhanced by the 
establishment of school-based safety committees, through 
existing community structures, in some targeted schools; 
to identify priorities, map existing resources within the 
community, prepare school-based contingency plans, 
and coordinate activities in the school. Parent Teacher 
Associations will also be involved in key education 
advocacy, in addition to collecting feedback from 
community members to enhance accountability to affected 
populations. Student groups will also ensure that students’ 
voices are integral to the design and implementation of 
emergency education activities. The Education Cluster will 
encourage partners to establish feedback and complaint 
mechanisms, where students and beneficiaries can raise 
their concerns and share recommendations. 

42 
PART II: SHELTER AND NON-FOOD ITEMS (NFIs) 
SHELTER AND NON-FOOD ITEMS (NFIs) 
BREAKDOWN CONTACTS OF PEOPLE IN NEED AND TARGETED BY STATUS, SEX AND AGE 
Fadi Shamisti 
Shelter Cluster Coordinator, 
West Bank 
fadi.shamisti@nrc.no 
Iyad Abu Hamam 
Shelter Cluster Coordinator, Gaza 
coord.gaza@sheltercluster.org 
UNRWA 
Gaza West Bank Total UNRWA 
Gaza 
UNRWA 
West 
Bank 
225,120 79,508 
47,425 38,195 19,845 19,845 
PEOPLE IN NEED 
PEOPLE TARGETED 
FINANCIAL 
REQUIREMENTS 
% female % children, 
adult, 
elderly* 
BY STATUS BY SEX & AGE 
*Children (<18 years old), adult 
$14M (18-59 years), elderly (>59 years) 
45% 50% 47% 
3% 
45% 50% 47% 
3% 
REQUIREMENTS (US$) 
14M 
PEOPLE TARGETED 
85K 
# OF PARTNERS 
14 
PEOPLE IN NEED 
0.3M 
STRATEGY 
The aim of the Shelter Cluster is to ensure that displaced 
Palestinians, and vulnerable households at risk of 
displacement or exposed to harsh weather and protection 
concerns, obtain timely and adequate shelter and NFI 
solutions. 
RESPONSE APPROACH 
First, partners will support displaced populations, 
particularly those affected by demolitions and forced 
eviction in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, 
to access adequate and safe temporary shelter. In Gaza, 
partners will provide temporary shelter assistance to 
families still displaced from the 2014 conflict to cover their 
basic needs and for families evicted, or at risk of eviction, 
as a result of the severe socioeconomic deterioration. Cash 
or material assistance will also be provided to Palestine 
and other refugees from the region unable to cope in 
Gaza. Finally, partners will support, with repair and 
rehabilitation assistance, the most vulnerable households 
across the oPt exposed to harsh weather or protection 
concerns. Where possible, they will prioritize durable 
climate protection that reduces the need for recurrent 
winterization assistance. 
Across the opt, the cluster will also work to increase 
capacity to respond to natural or manmade hazards, 
through the stockpiling and prepositioning of NFIs; 
community capacity-building to empower affected people 
to cope with sudden and protracted shocks and stresses; 
and the preparedness of Designated Emergency Shelters 
(DES) and for urban displacement in Gaza. 
PEOPLE TARGETED AND GEOGRAPHICAL SCOPE 
In 2019, the cluster will target 85,620 people, including 
2,500 IDP families (approximately 14,000 displaced people) 
in Gaza, and all eligible cases affected by demolitions or 
settler violence in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem. 
In total, 5,462 households (29,919 people) will be targeted 
to rehabilitate and upgrade poor and substandard shelters. 
4,304 vulnerable households (22,918 people) at risk of 
exposure or affected by natural or manmade hazards in 
Gaza and area C will be supported with winterization/ 
summarization interventions and protective materials. 
Stockpiles or prepositioning targets aim to have NFIs in 
place for up to 600,000 people at risk of flooding, winter 
storms or conflict in Gaza, while partners in the West 
Bank will target emergency response to harsh weather 
or protection threats for up to 3,000 people. A total of 18 
schools (19,245 people) are also targeted with either full or 
partial upgrades as DES. 
In Gaza, specific focus is given to areas potentially at risk of 
flooding, and potential host communities in the case of new 
hostilities with poor shelters in need for rehabilitation. In 

PART II: SHELTER AND NON-FOOD ITEMS (NFIs) 
43 
the West Bank, interventions are focused on areas affected 
by demolitions, Bedouin and herding communities in Area 
C, communities at high risk of forcible transfer or settler 
violence, and in East Jerusalem and H2. 
CRITERIA USED TO PRIORITIZE INTERVENTIONS 
For 2019, the cluster will guide partners to adopt a multidimensional 
prioritization approach based on adequate 
assessment and analysis for protection, socio-economic 
conditions, shelter vulnerability and the targeted 
geographical areas for proposed interventions. The cluster 
gives priority to those projects targeting particularly 
vulnerable groups, such as herding and marginalized 
communities located entirely in Area C, with poor shelters 
and in need of immediate protection. Also prioritized are 
vulnerable households in areas prone to flooding and have 
concerns from shelter inadequacy to withstand severe 
weather conditions and part of the IDPs that rely mainly on 
the TSCA to pay the rental costs and families evicted from 
their homes due to their inability to pay the rental costs, 
PWDs and widowed, separated or abandoned femaleheaded 
households. In addition, the cluster prioritizes 
projects that aim to reduce the number of people in need 
and decrease recurrent assistance by providing more 
durable and sustainable materials. 
PRIORITY RESPONSE INTERVENTIONS 
RESPONSIVE 
Definition: Activities that prevent displacement or 
provide immediate solutions for vulnerable displaced 
people (including NFIs, temporary shelter and Cash) 
for people living in collective centres, host families/ 
relatives or substandard rented accommodation. 
Activities that protect vulnerable people from the need 
for protection from natural (harsh weather conditions/ 
summerization/winterization) or manmade (forcible 
transfer or settler violence) disasters. 
Activities: 
nnProvision of temporary shelter assistance to IDPs from 
previous conflicts. 
nnProvision of shelter assistance to non-Palestine and 
Palestine refugees from the region. 
nnProvision of shelter assistance to households internally 
displaced or at risk of displacement due to economic 
deterioration and salary cuts. 
nnProvision of shelter assistance and protection to 
households affected by demolitions or settler violence. 
REMEDIAL 
Definition: Activities that provide temporary/medium 
term shelter solutions to protect, restore dignity and 
ensure adequate living conditions for vulnerable 
people, including shelter repair and rehabilitation 
activities (in kind and cash). Activities focus on 
adequate functionality of essential shelter elements, 
such as roof and wall leakage treatment, windows and 
doors, suitable floor, sufficient space, insulation and 
privacy. 
Activities: 
nnShelter maintenance, rehabilitation or upgrading 
through cash or materials assistance for vulnerable 
people. 
nnRestoration and repair of conflict-affected shelters. 
nnProvision of winterization/summerization assistance 
and/or shelter/household NFIs to vulnerable 
households at risk of exposure or affected by natural or 
manmade hazards. 
ENVIRONMENT-BUILDING 
Definition: any activity aimed at creating and/or 
consolidating an environment – social, cultural, 
institutional, economic and legal – conducive to full 
respect for the rights of the individual. 
Activities: 
nnAgency stockpiling and pre-positioning. 
nnImprove preparedness measures, including upgrade of 
DES. 
nnActivities that increases the capacity of government 
institutions, communities and individuals to provide 
sustainable and durable solutions. 
EXCLUDED ACTIVITIES, GROUPS AND/OR AREAS 
OF RESPONSE; LIKELY IMPACT/CONSEQUENCES; 
AND ACTIONS NEEDED BY OTHER ACTORS 
nnReconstruction of destroyed homes: this intervention 
was already excluded from previous HRPs and is 
undertaken by the government or other development 
agencies. However, delays in reconstruction is affecting 
the provision of TSCA which is included in the HRP. 
nnRental subsidies to IDPs from the 2014 conflict: 
targeting this year is limited to the most vulnerable 
currently re-displaced or at risk of re-displacement, or 
living in very substandard conditions due to their lack 
of affordability of rental fees.

44 
PART II: SHELTER AND NON-FOOD ITEMS (NFIs) 
nnCompensation for, of repair of, partially damaged 
shelters: out of about 56,000 partially-damaged 
households from the 2014 conflict, the target this year is 
the most vulnerable 4,000 households unable to repair 
their damaged shelters. 
nnRehabilitation of substandard shelters to minimum 
standards: activities are limited to the repair of the most 
essential and core items at household level, including 
the elements related to physical protection from rain, 
settler violence, overcrowding and GBV, limited 
thermal insulation, provision of NFI’s, maintenance 
of kitchen and bathroom facilities, and adaptation for 
PWDs (if any). 
INTER-SECTORAL LINKAGES 
Collaboration with the Protection Cluster, in particular 
the Legal Task Force, is essential in the implementation 
of shelter projects in Area C and East Jerusalem. Legal 
advice, overview of trends and context analysis will be 
sought to ensure the “do no harm” principle is upheld and 
to increase protection of provided assistance. The Cluster 
also works closely with the WASH cluster regarding the 
upgrading of WASH facilities at the household level, both 
in terms of standards and monitoring, and with the DES 
Working Group to coordinate the upgrading of schools 
as emergency shelters. In potential cases of overcrowding, 
the inputs of WASH and Health are pertinent to hygiene 
protection and disease control, and as well as to overall 
standards in the DES. For NFIs packages, the Shelter 
Cluster has a close coordination with FSS and WASH to 
standardize the packages, content and distribution. The 
Shelter Cluster collaborates with the MoPWH to track 
reconstruction progress and to support them with data 
management. 
MAINSTREAMING: PROTECTION, GENDER, AND 
COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT 
Shelter and NFIs Cluster activities adopt an integrated 
protection approach to ensure adequate climate 
protection, safety and security, privacy and dignity 
and improved wellbeing for occupants. Protection is 
measured at the outcome level by ensuring accordance 
with minimum standards and reported improvement in 
living conditions. In addition, the cluster has developed 
protection mainstreaming guidance to ensure a “do no 
harm” approach, non-discrimination and the inclusion of 
vulnerable populations. 
Gender equality and gender-responsive programming will 
be advanced through gender analysis; partners will address 
the gender needs based on the new GAM system for of 
men, women, boys and girls through active beneficiary 
engagement with all affected groups (not only community 
leaders) and disaggregated beneficiary data and monitoring 
indicators and analysis. In 2018, the Cluster carried out a 
discussion with UN-Women to address gender and age 
vulnerability in the shelter sector, the tip sheet provides 
guidance on how to approach and target different groups 
to strengthen gender integration in shelter projects. 
All shelter projects require community engagement 
at all stages of the project cycle, starting from needs 
identification, beneficiary selection, project design and 
implementation, and evaluation. In the West Bank in 
particular, where vulnerable groups are found in high risk 
areas, community engagement is vital in identifying risks 
and ensuring collaborative decision-making and informed 
consent as to the appropriate actions. Communities are 
increasingly involved in the planning and implementation 
of projects, enabling selection of the right materials and 
timing. The Cluster will ensure the inclusion of a sound 
M&E component in all the submitted projects as vetting 
criteria, to reflect clearly the complaint mechanism 
and how it will be accessible by beneficiaries and nonbeneficiaries, 
and communication channels identified for 
this purpose. 

PART II: COO RDINATION AND SUPPORT SERVICES 
45 
COORDINATION 
AND SUPPORT SERVICES 
STRATEGY 
The aim of the Coordination and Support Services (CSS) 
sector is to provide coordination for the implementation 
of a principled, timely, effective and efficient multi-year 
humanitarian strategy and operational response in the 
oPt, within the geographical scope identified as the area of 
operations for the 2018-2020 HRP. 
RESPONSE APPROACH 
The CCS sector will achieve this aim through a multipronged 
approach, capitalizing on the roles of each 
of the partners and their responsibilities within the 
humanitarian architecture in the oPt. First, CSS partners 
will ensure an effective coordination system is in place, 
in compliance with Inter-Agency Standing Committee 
(IASC) policies and guidance, that is responsive and 
effective in meeting the needs of humanitarian partners. 
Second, partners will ensure improved, inter-sectoral and 
inter-agency vulnerability and needs analysis, response 
planning and monitoring. Third, CSS partners will ensure 
the promotion of humanitarian principles, as well as the 
neutrality of staff, installations and premises. Fourth, 
the CSS sector will support the inter-agency Prevention 
of Sexual Exploitation and Abuse (PSEA) Network and 
the development of a country-level inter-agency PSEA 
Action Plan in accordance with the IASC’s commitments 
to prevent and respond to Sexual Exploitation and Abuse 
(SEA). Finally, the coordination architecture will continue 
to prioritize the centrality of protection throughout all 
its areas of work, and will seek to enhance local NGO 
participation, gender mainstreaming and community 
engagement. 
REQUIREMENTS (US$) 
18M 
# OF PARTNERS 
10 
PEOPLE TARGETED AND GEOGRAPHICAL SCOPE 
In 2019, the CSS sector will directly target the 88 
humanitarian organizations operational in the oPt, which 
will benefit from coordination, pooled funding and intraorganizational 
support, based on humanitarian principles, 
and other key tenets of humanitarian response. The 
indirect beneficiaries of coordination are the 1.4 million 
Palestinians targeted for humanitarian assistance in 2019, 
who will benefit from the coordinated and effective 
implementation of activities. 
The geographical area of focus for the CSS sector is the 
same as that for this HRP: all of Gaza, including the ARA, 
and the West Bank priority areas of East Jerusalem, Area 
C, and the H2 area of Hebron. 
2019 OPERATIONS: CRITERIA USED TO PRIORITIZE 
INTERVENTIONS 
The following CSS activities have been prioritized for 2019: 
facilitation of timely and effective humanitarian response 
through the system-wide leadership; coordination 
and advocacy of the HCT, the ICCG and individual 
clusters; strengthened joint and cluster-specific needs 
assessments; improved joint data collection, joint analysis 
and information management; joint periodic monitoring 
of the response and impact evaluation over a multi-year 
timeframe; preparedness activities; targeted advocacy, 
including through the HCT Advocacy Working Group 
(AWG); targeted briefings for a variety of stakeholders 
on the humanitarian situation in the oPt; and the effective 
and timely allocation of pooled humanitarian financial 
resources in accordance with HCT priorities. 
CONTACT 
Sheri Ritsema- 
Anderson 
Deputy Head of Office, OCHA 
ritsema@un.org

46 
PART II: COO RDINATION AND SUPPORT SERVICES 
PRIORITY RESPONSE INTERVENTIONS 
RESPONSIVE 
Definition: Activities that support national and 
international organizations’ response activities 
to be coordinated with humanitarian coordination 
fora throughout the Humanitarian Programme 
Cycle (HPC). Particularly, activities to increase the 
participation of national NGOs in coordination and 
capacity of national NGOs. Activities on humanitarian 
financing, including the oPt Humanitarian Fund and 
CERF, to be strategically used to address particular 
needs according to HCT priorities, while allocations 
are awarded to address the most urgent needs in a 
manner that maximizes value for money. Provision 
of key services and assistance based on the needs 
jointly identified by inter-sectoral humanitarian 
needs assessments. Activities to annually update 
the strategic humanitarian response at all levels and 
sectors, and conduct the joint HRP monitoring and 
evaluation twice a year. 
Activities: 
nnManage the Humanitarian Pooled Fund allocations and 
ensure that allocations are awarded according to HCT 
priorities, and in a manner that maximizes value for 
money. 
nnUndertake regular joint HRP monitoring and evaluation 
products. 
nnUpdate, as needed, the strategic humanitarian response 
at all levels and sectors, before end 2019 
nnFacilitate local NGOs engagement in the HRP with selfled 
projects. 
nnEnsure full national and international NGO engagement 
in coordinated response activities. 
nnFacilitate the coordination and provision of 
humanitarian response through facilitation of intersectoral 
humanitarian needs assessments. 
REMEDIAL 
Definition: activities to include the implementation 
of core processes and structures for humanitarian 
action, including secretariat functions in support of 
humanitarian leaders, the HCT, ICCG, inter-agency 
PSEA Network and Information Management Working 
Group. Close partnership with line ministries. 
Activities focus on inter-cluster coordination on 
cross-cutting issues, including communicating with 
communities, gender mainstreaming and protection 
mainstreaming, to address the 2018-2020 multi-year 
strategic objectives. Information management to 
improve situation awareness and influence decisionmaking 
and planning response activities. 
Activities: 
nnFacilitate coordination meetings at country and 
operational levels to ensure a common situation 
awareness and a timely, appropriate and effective 
humanitarian response (HCT meetings, ICCG national 
and sub-national level meetings, cluster meetings). 
nnFacilitate the mainstreaming of key elements into the 
HRP, including ensuring gender considerations are 
reflected, a protection lens is consistently applied, 
PSEA is integrated; and that project approaches involve 
effective community engagement. 
nnProduce and publish a variety of IM products to inform 
decision-making and planning. 
nnMaintain common de-centralized information systems/ 
platforms that are made accessible to the HCT as well 
as creating/updating common operational datasets and 
functional information datasets as needed. 
ENVIRONMENT - BUILDING 
Definition: activities to build resilience to be better 
prepared for humanitarian emergencies. Activities 
that update the inter-agency contingency plan and 
cluster-specific contingency plans, partner presence 
and operational capacity mapping. Activities on 
coordination, advocacy and private diplomacy to be 
strengthened to mobilize action. 

PART II: COO RDINATION AND SUPPORT SERVICES 
47 
Activities: 
nnEnsure implementation of actions to support emergency 
response readiness. 
nnUpdate multi-year strategic plan, as required, before 
end 2019. 
nnFacilitate joint or coordinated advocacy events on 
humanitarian issues of concern, including at the HCT 
level. 
nnConduct briefings on humanitarian principles and/or 
the protection crisis driving humanitarian needs in the 
oPt. 
EXCLUDED ACTIVITIES, GROUPS AND/OR AREAS 
OF RESPONSE; LIKELY IMPACT/CONSEQUENCES; 
AND ACTIONS NEEDED BY OTHER ACTORS 
The sector has excluded UNRWA headquarters and 
internal preparedness activities ensuring efficiencies and 
consolidation. 
INTER-SECTORAL LINKAGES 
The CSS partners will leverage their roles and responsibilities 
to ensure that every opportunity is maximized to improve 
the impact and efficiency of coordination and support 
services for humanitarian action. Greater efficiencies will 
be sought by, inter alia, improving the evidence-base for 
humanitarian needs and interventions, at the ICCG and 
cluster levels, including by piloting new methodologies to 
facilitate inter-sector vulnerability analysis and response 
planning. Humanitarian assistance will furthermore 
continue to be delivered through partner implementation 
of project activities that may span more than one cluster 
area of responsibility, enhancing the coordination between 
clusters and partners, and strengthening the response in a 
holistic way through multi-sector and inter-cluster linkages. 
Enhancing local NGO participation in the humanitarian 
response will aim to improve the sustainability, impact 
and cost-effectiveness of interventions. The effectiveness 
of the multi-year humanitarian strategy will be sought 
through targeted advocacy and diplomacy, including for 
multi-year resource mobilization. Finally, enhancing the 
linkages and synergies with interventions outside the 
scope of the humanitarian plan (see below) is expected – if 
met by effective response by counterparts – to also achieve 
greater efficiencies and impact, and lead to a reduction 
in the overall levels of vulnerability and the need for 
humanitarian coordination and support services in the 
oPt. 
During the second year of the three-year multi-year 
strategy, the CSS sector will continue to support the 
development of linkages and synergies with actors 
outside the scope of the humanitarian sector, leveraging 
the comparative advantages of different stakeholders. 
Interventions outside the scope of humanitarian action will 
be promoted wherever possible and appropriate, in order to 
address the root causes of vulnerability. Coordination will 
be improved, engagement and advocacy strengthened, and 
partnerships with key stakeholders encouraged, in order 
to avoid the duplication of interventions by humanitarian 
and development actors. 

CONTRIBUTING 
TO THE 
HUMANITARIAN 
RESPONSE PLAN 
To consult the oPt Humanitarian Needs 
Overview (HNO), Humanitarian Response Plan 
(HRP) and monitoring reports, and to link up 
with organizations participating to the plan 
through the clusters, please visit: 
https://www.humanitarianresponse.info/en/ 
operations/occupied-palestinian-territory 
DONATING 
THROUGH 
THE CENTRAL 
EMERGENCY 
RESPONSE FUND (CERF) 
CERF provides rapid initial funding for lifesaving 
actions at the onset of emergencies 
and for poorly funded, essential humanitarian 
operations in protracted crises around the 
world. The OCHA managed CERF receives 
voluntary contributions from various donors 
– mainly governments, but also private 
companies, foundations, charities and 
individuals – which are combined into a single 
fund. 
CERF also provides funding to the world’s most 
neglected crises. When a disaster fades from 
the headlines, or never makes the headlines, 
it is much harder to raise funds. The need for 
help, however, is no less significant. 
Find out more about the CERF and how to 
donate by visiting the CERF website: 
www.unocha.org/cerf/our-donors/how-donate 
DONATING 
THROUGH 
THE COUNTRY 
HUMANITARIAN 
FUND 
The Humanitarian Fund (HF) in the oPt is a 
country-based pooled fund (CBPF). CBPFs 
are multi-donor humanitarian financing 
instruments established by the Emergency 
Relief Coordinator (ERC) and managed 
by OCHA at the country level under the 
leadership of the Humanitarian Coordinator 
(HC), with the support of the Review Board. In 
addition, an Advisory Board provides general 
policy and strategy guidance on the overall 
oPt HF process and priorities. Members of the 
oPt HF Advisory Board include the donors to 
the fund and representatives of national and 
international NGOs and UN agencies. 
Find out more about the HF in the oPt by 
visiting the oPt HF website: 
http://www.ochaopt.org/content/opthumanitarian-
fund 
For information on how to make a contribution, 
please contact Saad Abdel-Haq, HPF manager: 
abdel-haq@un.org 
IN-KIND RELIEF AID 
The United Nations urges donors to make cash rather than in-kind donations, for maximum speed and flexibility, and to ensure the 
aid materials that are most needed are the ones delivered. If you can make only in-kind contributions in response to disasters and 
emergencies, please contact: logik@un.org 
HRP 
REGISTERING AND RECOGNIZING YOUR CONTRIBUTIONS 
OCHA manages the Financial Tracking Service (FTS), which records all reported humanitarian contributions 
(cash, in-kind, multilateral and bilateral) to emergencies. Its purpose is to give credit and visibility 
to donors for their generosity and to show the total amount of funding and expose gaps in humanitarian 
plans. Please report yours to FTS, either by email to fts@un.org or through the online contribution report 
form at http://fts.unocha.org 
GUIDE TO GIVING

PART III: COO RDINATION AND SUPPORT SERVICES 
49 
Response monitoring ......................................................... 13 
Summary of needs, targets & requirements ................... 14 
PART II: OPERATIONAL; RESPONSE PLANS 
Food security ....................................................................... 16 
Coordination ....................................................................... 17 
Refugee response plan ...................................................... 18 
Guide to giving ................................................................... 19 
PART III: ANNEXES 
Objectives, indicators & targets 
Participating organizations & funding requirements 
Endnotes 
What if? ... we fail to respond 
PART III: ANNEXES

50 
PART III: COO RDINATION AND SUPPORT SERVICES 
MONITORING TABLES 
2018-2020 STRATEGIC 
OBJECTIVES AND INDICATORS 
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 1: The rights of Palestinians living under occupation, including those living under the blockade and other 
restrictions, are protected, respected and promoted in accordance with IHL and IHRL, while duty-bearers are increasingly held to account 
INDICATOR 
Organisation(s) 
responsible for 
data collection 
IN NEED BASELINE 
TARGET 
2018 
TARGET 
2019 
TARGET 
2020 
SECTOR RELATED ACTIVITY INDICATORS 
# of Security Council Briefings 
reflecting HCT language and priorities 
on protection and/or broader 
humanitarian issues in Gaza and the 
West Bank 
OCHA Advocacy 
WG tracking matrix 
Text of the 
Security Council 
Briefings 
N/A 8 12 12 12 # of information products produced to improve 
situation aware 
# of information products produced to improve 
situation awareness 
# of local briefings and/or field visits 
# of reports of incidents on grave violations against 
children issued quarterly to allow trends analysis 
# of reports on violations, focused on IHL and IHRL 
violations and conflict-related violence 
# of people requiring protection 
interventions (GBV, Child Protection, 
MHPSS, Legal Aid) 
Protection 
partners 
1,971,819 N/A 1,920,000 325,000 338,000 # of people in need receiving protection interventions 
(GBV, Child Protection, MHPSS, Legal Aid) 
% of Area C communities at risk 
of forcible transfer with access to 
protection services 
Protection 
partners 
100% N/A 100% 100% 100% # of individuals receiving legal assistance on HLP 
# of individuals receiving counselling on residency 
# of beneficiaries receiving legal awareness sessions 
Total 1,971,819 350,000 
PART III: RESPONSE MONITORING TABLES

PART III: COO RDINATION AND SUPPORT SERVICES 
51 
Strategic objective 2: The basic needs of vulnerable Palestinians living under occupation are met through the provision of quality basic services 
and improved access to resources, in accordance with the rights of protected persons under International Humanitarian Law 
INDICATOR 
Organisation(
s) 
responsible 
for data 
collection 
IN NEED BASELINE 
TARGET 
2018 
TARGET 
2019 
TARGET 
2020 
SECTOR RELATED ACTIVITY INDICATORS 
% of vulnerable people in West Bank 
and Gaza accessing quality and affordable 
essential health by type of service, 
including nutrition, maternal and child 
health, reproductive health, mental 
health, health care for elderly, and rehabilitation 
services for people with 
disabilities (PWD) 
Health 
partners 
1,163,618 N/A 74% 64% 
(744,346 
people) 
64% # of casualties received trauma care 
# of neonates receiving quality health and nutrition services 
# of < 5 children receiving targeted health and nutritional 
interventions 
# of pregnant lactating women received reproductive 
health service 
# of patients who received essential secondary care services 
in Gaza (medications provided/prescribed, diagnostic 
procedures, medical interventions including dialysis) 
# of people with access to primary healthcare services in 
the West Bank (outpatient consultations, NCDs, antenatal 
care, reproductive health) 
# of patients benefitted from essential health services 
powered from alternative emergency source(s) 
# of acutely vulnerable boys, girls, men and women receiving 
mental health and psychosocial support (cross reference 
with Protection Cluster) 
# of affected people benefitted from prepositioned supplies 
within the first 24 hours of an emergency 
% of vulnerable people with access to 
safe drinking and domestic water services 
and benefiting from improved access 
to sanitation and hygiene services 
WASH 
partners 
100% 
(1,900,635 
people) 
41% 41% 32% 
(626,403 
people) 
36% # of people have benefited from improved access to safe 
drinking and domestic water services 
# of people have benefited from improved access to sanitation 
and hygiene services 
% of assisted families reported improvement 
in living conditions 
Shelter 
partners 
100% 
(27,135 
people) 
N/A 80% 100% 
(27,135 
people) 
80% # of HH assisted to upgrade substandard housing unit 
# of HH assisted to repair damaged housing unit 
# of HH assisted with emergency shelter or household 
NFIs in-kind 
% of assisted HH living in upgraded 
units in accordance with minimum standards 
Shelter 
partners 
100% 
(12,871 
people) 
N/A 90% 90% 
(12,871 
people) 
90% # of HH assisted to Rehabilitate substandard housing unit 
# of vulnerable HH assisted to repair damaged shelters 
% of vulnerable students and teachers 
with improved access to school 
Education 
partners 
496,485 N/A 79% 64% 
(316,813) 
79% # of students and teachers in vulnerable communities 
benefiting from protective presence and accompaniment 
to and from school 
# of students in vulnerable communities benefiting from 
safe transportation 
# of students and teachers benefiting from the provision 
of material support, additional learning spaces and teaching/
learning supplies 
# of students and teachers benefiting from emergency 
school rehabilitation 
# of children with disabilities benefiting from the adapted 
education services and assistive devices 
Total 3,600,744 1,727,568 
PART III: RESPONSE MONITORING TABLES

52 
PART III: COO RDINATION AND SUPPORT SERVICES 
Strategic objective 3: The capacity of vulnerable Palestinians to cope with and overcome protracted crisis, including from environmental threats, 
is supported, while solutions to violations and other root causes of threats and shocks are pursued 
INDICATOR 
Organisation(s) 
responsible for 
data collection 
IN NEED BASELINE 
TARGET 
2018 
TARGET 
2019 
TARGET 
2020 
SECTOR RELATED ACTIVITY INDICATORS 
% of students who are 
better supported following 
education-related violations, 
escalations in the conflict or 
natural disaster 
Education 
partners 
324,020 23% 61% 81% 
(262,624 
people) 
61% # of schools supported in preparing and/or 
responding to emergencies 
# of students, parents and school staff 
benefiting from school-based psychosocial 
support services 
# of students benefiting from remedial 
education services 
FSS beneficiaries targeted 
who report improved coping 
strategies 1 
FSS partners N/A TBD2 Stable or 
improved 
Stable or 
improved 
Stable or 
improved 
# of farmers, herders and fishers beneficiaries 
receiving inputs and services 
# of dunums made productive or with improved 
production capacity (full and partial land 
rehabilitation, piping and irrigation system, 
seeds and seedlings distribution, etc.) 
# of greenhouses rehabilitated 
# of km of agricultural roads rehabilitated 
# of water wells rehabilitated 
# of km of water carrier lines rehabilitated or 
provided 
# of m3 of water storage rehabilitated or 
provided 
# of livestock and poultry farms/sheds 
rehabilitated 
% of identified vulnerable 
communities and health 
facilities in West Bank 
and Gaza have better 
preparedness to cope with 
impact of current and future 
crisis 
Health partners 51,987 N/A 76% 99% 
(51,986 people) 
50% # of patients benefitting from referral to non- 
MoH facilities disaggregated by age/sex 
# of partners actively documenting attacks of 
health care 
% of reduction of individuals 
in the emergency caseload 
as a result of sustainable 
climate protection activities 
Shelter 
partners 
27,135 N/A 8.3% 10% 10% # of HH assisted to Rehabilitate substandard 
housing unit 
# of vulnerable HH assisted to repair damaged 
shelters 
# of HH provided with climate protection 
assistance (emergency shelter or household 
NFIs in-kind or in Cash) 
# of HH assisted with shelter protective 
materials 
% of individuals in need of 
support with shelter NFIs 
(cash/in-kind) at the onset of 
an emergency 
Shelter 
partners 
610,0003 N/A 16% 0.6% 
(3,750 people) 
30% # of HH provided with climate protection 
assistance (emergency shelter or household 
NFIs in-kind or in Cash) 
# of HH assisted with shelter protective 
materials 
# of HH supported with training and tools for 
self-recovery or protection measures 
# of schools partially/fully prepared for use 
as DES 
% of individuals able to be 
sheltered at DES according to 
agreed standards 
Shelter 
partners 
114,000 30% 73% 30% 
(34,000 people) 
100% # of HH supported with training and tools for 
self-recovery or protection measures 
# HHs under risk of displacement have 
adequate shelter/NFIs stocks according to 
ICCG contingency plans 
# of schools partially/fully prepared for use 
as DES 
% of people in need with 
increased WASH capacity 
during emergencies and 
shocks 
WASH partners 206,435 N/A 60% 61% 
(127,293 
people) 
51% Liters of fuel supplied to service providers 
to ensure water, wastewater and solid waste 
services 
# of WASH facilities benefitting from essential 
maintenance and operational items 
# of WASH emergency preparedness and 
response plans at all levels (partners, 
municipalities, etc.) 
# of WASH interventions to mitigate and 
respond to flooding 
Total 1,306,442 479,653 
*The 2019 Cluster monitoring framework is available through: https://hum-insight.info/ 
1. To be provided with the project start-up 
2. (GS: 600,000; WB: 10,000) 
PART III: RESPONSE MONITORING TABLES

PART III: PARTICIPATING ORGANIZATIONS AND FUNDING IREMENTS 
53 
PARTICIPATING ORGANIZATIONS AND FUNDING 
IREMENTS ORGANIZATION FUNDING 
REQUIREMENTS ($) 
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for 
Palestine Refugees in the Near East 
131,802,162 
World Food Programme 46,402,884 
NGOs 15,493,533 
United Nations Children's Fund 13,475,687 
Food & Agriculture Organization of the United 
Nations 
11,167,517 
Save the Children 11,165,938 
World Health Organization 10,969,481 
Action Against Hunger 10,020,724 
Norwegian Refugee Council 6,886,561 
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs 6,644,997 
OXFAM Netherlands (NOVIB) 5,983,882 
Gruppo Volontariato Civile 4,672,254 
Première Urgence Internationale 4,440,992 
CARE International 4,267,552 
United Nations Population Fund 4,196,340 
ACT Alliance / Dan Church Aid - Norwegian Church 
Aid Joint office in Palestine 
3,921,915 
Medical Aid for Palestinians 3,684,770 
Union of Agricultural Work Committees 3,354,761 
NGO Development Center 3,010,457 
Handicap International / Humanity & Inclusion 2,821,861 
MA'AN Development Center 2,393,091 
Agency for Technical Cooperation and 
Development 
2,243,121 
Global Communities 2,189,686 
Save Youth Future Society 2,083,540 
Mercy Corps 2,058,474 
Agricultural Development Association 2,013,056 
Médecins du Monde France 1,659,170 
Canadian Catholic Organization for Development 
and Peace (Caritas Canada) 
1,500,000 
Norwegian People's Aid 1,430,899 
United Nations Mine Action Service 1,400,000 
UN Women 1,238,136 
Medico International 1,200,000 
Islamic Relief Worldwide 984,000 
Comitato Internationale per lo Sviluppo dei Popoli 940,530 
AISHA Association for Woman and Child 
Protection 
908,100 
Arab Agronomist Association 891,949 
Palestinian Youth Union 830,802 
Terre des Hommes - Lausanne 828,500 
Qatar Red Crescent Society 806,969 
World Vision Jerusalem West Bank Gaza 806,908 
United Nations Office for Project Services 797,040 
The Arab and International Commission to Build 
Gaza 
792,000 
We Effect 668,594 
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights 600,000 
Cooperazione E Sviluppo - CESVI 597,027 
Palestinian Hydrology Group 590,000 
Médecins du Monde Suisse 588,988 
Palestinian Al Nakheel Association for Progress 
and Development 
582,400 
Arab Center for Agricultural Development 565,797 
Baitona for Community Development 564,438 
Terre des Hommes - Italy 545,000 
Palestinian Housing Council 541,581 
Culture and Free Thought Association 516,000 
Asamblea De Cooperacion Por La Paz 502,586 
El-Wafa Rehabilitation Hospital 500,000 
Atfaluna Society for Deaf Children 485,200 
Medicos del Mundo Spain 455,000 
Palestinian Hydrology Group 450,000 
United Nations Development Programme 448,581 
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural 
Organization 
448,367 
Health Work Committees 446,350 
Union of Health Work Committees 432,141 
Thalassemia Patients’ Friends Society 400,000 
Tamer Institute for Community Education 360,000 
EducAid Onlus 335,450 
Fundación Alianza por Los Derechos, la Igualdad y 
la Solidaridad Internacional 
325,881 
National Center for Community Rehabilitation 308,800 
Gaza Community Mental Health Programme 283,950 
Hayfa Charitable Medical Centre Association 283,392 
Central Blood Bank Society 276,720 
Palestinian Center for Democracy and Conflict 
Resolution 
263,398 
Human Appeal UK 250,000 
War Child Holland 249,989 
B'Tselem - the Israeli Information Center for 
Human Rights in the Occupied Territories 
236,178 
Center for Women’s Legal Research and Consulting 219,891 
Rural Women's Development Society 193,323 
Bait Almostaqbul Association 176,904 
Al Mezan Center for Human Rights 170,000 
The Society of Women Graduates in Gaza strip 156,000 
Center for the Defence of the Individual 150,457 
Women's Affairs Center 142,969 
AFKAR for Educational and Cultural Development 139,900 
Mabarret Phalastine for Caring Society 138,109 
Red Crescent Society for Gaza Strip (NNGO) 133,727 
Wefaq Society for Women and Child Care 133,727 
Youth Empowerment Center 121,630 
Palestinian Center for Human Rights 100,000 
Public Committee Against Torture in Israel 80,587 
Civic Coalition for Palestinian Rights in Jerusalem 50,000 
Grand Total 350,589,271 

54 
PART III: ENDNOTES 
ENDNOTES 
1. Injury figures for Palestinians are from the Ministry of Health in Gaza. In the same period there has been one Israeli military 
fatality and 40 injuries. According to the Israeli authorities, the "Great March of Return" has been “planned and led by 
Hamas” and the launching of incendiary kites and balloons from Gaza towards Israel has resulted in more than 2,600 hectares 
of agricultural fields and forests damaged by fire. http://mfa.gov.il/MFA/ForeignPolicy/Terrorism/Palestinian/Pages/ 
Wave-of-terror-October-2015.aspx 
2. Regarding the “Great March of Return”, Israel’s Supreme Court rejected a petition filed by human rights NGOs, which challenged 
the legality under international law of the open fire regulations used during the demonstrations. 
3. According to recent study by the RAND Corporation, illness caused by water pollution is responsible for more than a quarter 
of illnesses in Gaza and is a leading cause of child mortality. As 97 per cent of drinking water does not meet international 
standards, a third of residents’ monthly wages goes toward the purchase of bottled water compared to 0.7 percent of monthly 
wages in the West in general. ‘Polluted Water Leading Cause of Child Mortality in Gaza, Study Finds’, Ha’aretz, 16 October 
2018. 
4. World Bank, Economic Monitoring Report to the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee, 27 September 2018, para. 1. 
5. UNCTAD: Report on UNCTAD assistance to the Palestinian people: Developments in the economy of the Occupied Palestinian 
Territory July 2018, para. 31. 
6. World Bank, Economic Monitoring Report to the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee, 27 September 2018, para. 1. 
7. OCHA Protection of Civilians database. At the same time 149 incidents resulting in Israeli casualties or damage carried out 
by Palestinians in, or from, the West Bank were recorded. 
8. The community is among dozens of Palestinian Bedouin communities, the majority of whom are refugee, at risk of forcible 
transfer in the central West Bank. For nine years, the residents have fought a legal struggle at the Israeli High Court of Justice 
(HCJ) to prevent the destruction of their community. On 23 September, following a HCJ ruling, the Israeli authorities 
warned residents that they had to self-demolish their homes and other structures by 1 October, otherwise the authorities 
would do so: on 21 October Israel temporarily froze the demolition. 
9. For more information on the Centrality of Protection in Humanitarian Action, please see https://interagencystandingcommittee.
org/sites/default/files/centrality_of_protection_in_humanitarian_action_statement_by_iasc_princi.pdf 
10. Source: https:shop.icrc.org/icrc/pdf/view/id/2261 
11. Grand Bargain commitment 2: “More support and funding tools for local and national responders”. 
12. Nevertheless, the protracted and unique context of the oPt renders the full transition of clusters to Palestinian government 
leadership or the deactivation of clusters unlikely in the foreseeable period. The continuation of access restrictions to Area 
C, East Jerusalem, Hebron H2, and Gaza; potential for renewed cycles of conflict; and the centrality of protection as a system-
wide responsibility of the humanitarian community necessitates that the cluster system remains operational in those 
areas and is ready to scale up as required. 
13. Financial Tracking Service (FTS) website: https://fts.unocha.org/. 
14. Capacities will be further strengthened by exploring the creation of a platform for communication, learning and knowledge 
exchange between partners and to establish linkages between emergency and development through interventions that build 
resilience in affected communities. 
15. Activities will include strengthened tracking of essential morbidity and mortality data; creating an evidenced-based database 
to drive forward health programming; and enhancing the monitoring of violence against healthcare personnel and facilities. 
16. WFP and the Ministry of Social Development (MoSD), which provides assistance to 125,000 food insecure people through 
its social safety net programme, are targeting those under the Deep Poverty line, using a Proxy Means Test Formula (PMTF). 
UNRWA also utilizes a PMTF as a targeting tool, with a slightly adjusted formula. WFP, UNRWA, and MoSD coordinate to 
avoid duplications. 

PART III: ENDNOTES 
55 
CHILDREN IN GAZA 
AND WEST BANK WILL 
NOT RECEIVE NEEDED 
CHILD PROTECTION AND 
PSYCHOSOCIAL SUPPORT 
SERVICES 
Palestinian children are growing up 
with a deep sense of hopelessness and 
insecurity about their future. Family 
and community-based support and 
psychosocial interventions are urgently 
needed to prevent the progression of 
psychosocial distress to mental health 
disorders, and to strengthen the ability 
of facilities to support over 45,436 
children. With one in four children in 
Gaza needing psychosocial support, 
the lack of support for child protection 
interventions will mean that families with 
complex problems will not receive the 
support and referrals they need. 
THE PLIGHT OF 1.7 
MILLION FOOD INSECURE 
PALESTINIANS WILL 
FURTHER DETERIORATE 
1.7 million Palestinians in the oPt are 
currently considered food insecure. 
If we are not able to deliver food and 
livelihoods assistance to these people, 
food insecurity could increase, livelihood 
could be irreversibly lost, and families 
will turn to negative coping mechanism, 
such as reducing their food intake, 
selling productive assets or reducing 
expenditure on basics like education and 
health, in order to try to keep their heads 
above water. 
EDUCATION WILL CONTINUE 
TO BE AFFETED BY 
CONFLICT AND OCCUPATION 
WITHOUT MITIGATION 
Without adequate protective measures 
and protective presence activities, 
material support, as well as advocacy, 
reporting and legal and psychosocial 
support, approximately 316,813 
Palestinian school children and teachers 
will continue to risk unacceptable attacks 
on their access to education. In the West 
Bank children’s education is affected for 
example by military activities, including 
military incursions onto school grounds. 
In Gaza, school children suffer from 
a range of humanitarian challenges, 
including continuous power outages, 
overcrowded schooling conditions and 
limited hours of instruction. 
WHAT IF? 
...WE FAIL TO RESPOND 
INTERNALLY DISPLACED 
PERSONS (IDPS) IN GAZA 
WILL CONTINUE TO LIVE 
IN PRECARIOUS HOUSING 
CONDITIONS 
Without funding for transitional solutions, 
such as cash to rent homes or repair their 
damaged houses, around 16,500 IDPs in 
Gaza will continue to live in precarious 
and risky conditions including unrepaired 
damaged houses, caravans, tents and 
makeshift shelters. In the absence of 
durable solutions, the effects of winter 
weather will increase the vulnerability of 
these people, affecting their physical and 
mental health and wellbeing. 
ONE MILLION PEOPLE 
COULD BE EXPOSED TO 
PUBLIC HEALTH RISKS DUE 
TO UNSAFE WATER 
Without funding for interventions to 
provide clean and safe water, up to one 
million people in Gaza could be exposed 
to severe public health risks, including 
an outbreak of waterborne diseases. 
In the West Bank, the destruction of 
essential WASH infrastructure has led 
to displacement, increased poverty, and 
also an increased risk of disease and 
illness. 
VULNERABLE PEOPLE 
WILL BE DENIED BASIC 
HEALTHCARE 
If we fail to respond, 1.25 million 
Palestinians identified as most 
vulnerable and at high risks of 
morbidity and mortality, including 
women of reproductive age; children, 
including neonates; the elderly; people 
with disabilities (PwD); and noncommunicable 
disease (NCD) patients 
(including mental health patients) 
will face the risk of dead or a severe 
deterioration in their health status. 

NOTES

NOTES

This document is produced on behalf of the Humanitarian Country Team and partners. 
This document provides the Humanitarian Country Team’s shared understanding of the crisis, including the most 
pressing humanitarian needs, and reflects its joint humanitarian response planning. 
The designation employed and the presentation of material on this report do not imply the expression of any opinion 
whatsoever on the part of the Humanitarian Country Team and partners concerning the legal status of any country, 
territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. 
www.ochaopt.org 
www.humanitarianresponse.info 
@OCHAoPt

