period 
January–December 2019 
to assist 
513 000 people 
FAO requires 
USD 10 million 
Democratic 
People’s 
Republic of 
Korea 
Needs and priorities 
2019 
In agriculture-reliant Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, food 
insecurity and malnutrition are widespread. Recurrent natural disasters 
significantly affect agricultural and food production. 
Objectives 
• Improve sustainable food-based approaches to help expand domestic 
food production so that supply levels of staple and nutritious foods are 
adequate to feed the population. 
• Strengthen resilience of cooperative farms and small-scale farmers 
to help contend with recurrent shocks and climate-related disaster 
events. 
Activities 
Increase availability of and access to diverse, nutritious foods 
seeds | fertilizer | plastic sheets | irrigation pump | hand tools | small 
ruminants | cooperative support | technical maintenance training 
Environmental rehabilitation and disaster risk reduction 
capacity building for food production | agricultural production support | 
building productive assets | embankments repair | dam and irrigation 
systems construction or rehabilitation 
Natural disasters contribute 
to annual reductions in 
end of year harvests, which 
could further increase food 
insecurity. Therefore, it 
is critical to ensure that 
diverse and nutritious food is 
available for and accessible to 
those most in need. 
© FAO/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea 
FAO in the 2019 humanitarian appeals | Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

Impact on food security 
Chronic food insecurity and malnutrition is extensive in the Democratic 
People’s Republic of Korea. The strong link between food insecurity 
and malnutrition means any negative impact on agriculture and food 
production has widespread and long-lasting impacts and compounds the 
already widespread undernutrition that exists throughout the country. In 
resource-poor settings, food scarcity leads to poor dietary quality for many 
people, with limited consumption of food that is rich in protein, fat and 
micronutrients. This means most people do not consume an adequately 
diverse diet, which reinforces cycles of undernutrition, particularly among 
women and children. The country is critically dependent on agriculture for 
its food security, which has been severely affected over the past six years by 
natural disasters, such as floods and drought, which erode farmers’ coping 
capacities. Even relatively small-scale events can have serious impacts on 
food production. Each year, the domestic food production does not meet 
needs by approximately 1 million tonnes, due to not only natural disasters 
but also shortages of arable land, lack of access to modern agricultural 
equipment and fertilizers. Due to these impacts, food insecurity is expected 
to increase, particularly among the most vulnerable. 
One of the major challenges facing the country is enabling the agriculture 
sector to cope with the impacts of climate change by building capacities in 
climate change adaptation, early warning systems, disaster preparedness, 
response and recovery, as well as building back better (construction 
planning and standards). In 2019, productive assets need to be restored if hit 
by natural disasters and enhanced to ensure continued supply of food and 
other essential services for people in need. In addition, unrelenting gaps in 
nutritional status between rural and urban populations need to be reduced. 
Vincent Martin 
FAO Representative 
Pyongyang, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea 
FAO-KP@fao.org 
Food and Agriculture Organization 
of the United Nations 
www.fao.org/emergencies 
www.fao.org/resilience 
Contact 
Dominique Burgeon 
Director, Emergency and Resilience Division 
and Strategic Programme Leader – Resilience 
Rome, Italy | TCE-Director@fao.org 
Some rights reserved. This work is available 
under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 IGO licence 
Areas of intervention (2019) 
Source: WFP, 2010 
The boundaries and names shown and the designations 
used on this map do not imply the expression of any 
opinion whatsoever on the part of FAO concerning the 
legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its 
authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers 
and boundaries. Dashed lines on maps represent 
approximate border lines for which there may not yet be 
full agreement. 
Situation analysis 
10.9 million people 
(43% of the population) 
food insecure 
1 in 5 children suffer from 
stunting (chronic malnutrition) 
©FAO, 2019 
CA3266EN/1/02.19 
1/3 of children (6–23 months) 
do not receive the minimum 
acceptable diet 
THE RUSSIAN 
FEDERATION 
THE REPUBLIC 
OF KOREA 
CHINA 
Ryanggang 
South 
Hamgyong 
Chagang 
North 
Pyongan 
South 
Pyongan 
Pyongan 
Kangwon 
North 
Hwanghae 
South 
Hwanghae 
Rason 
North 
Hamgyong

