01 
JANUARY-DECEMBER 
2019 
JOINT RESPONSE PLAN FOR ROHINGYA 
HUMANITARIAN CRISIS

03 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
PART I: OVERVIEW AND 2019 RESPONSE STRATEGY 
List of Abbreviations 05 
Foreword (Co-Chairs of the Strategic Executive Group) 06 
Reference Map 07 
Overall Population In Need 09 
Overview of the Crisis and Needs 10 
Protection Framework for Humanitarian Response 14 
2019 Response Strategy 17 
Coordination and Monitoring 20 
The New Way of Working and the Humanitarian/Development Nexus 23 
Cross-Cutting Issues 24 
Protection and Gender Mainstreaming 24 
Environment and Eco-System Rehabilitation 24 
Natural Disaster Preparedness 24 
Social Cohesion 25 
People Targeted by Sector 26 
PART II: SECTOR STRATEGIES 
Protection 28 
Food Security 33 
Education 35 
Site Management and Site Development 37 
Health 39 
Nutrition 41 
Water, Sanitation and Hygiene 43 
Shelter and Non-Food Items 45 
Communication with Communities 47 
Emergency Telecommunications 49 
Logistics 51 
Coordination 53

04 
This document is produced on behalf of the Strategic Executive Group and partners. 
This document provides the Strategic Executive Group’s shared understanding of the crisis, including the most 
pressing humanitarian needs and the estimated number of people who need assistance. It represents a consolidated 
evidence base and helps inform joint strategic response planning. 
The designations employed and the presentation of material in the report do not imply the expression of any opinion 
whatsoever on the part of the Secretariat of the United Nations concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city 
or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. 
Cover photo credit: UNFPA / Allison Joyce / 2018 
www.humanitarianresponse.info/en/operations/bangladesh 
ANNEXES 
Annex I: Cross-Cutting Issues 56 
Annex II: Rohingya JRP Monitoring Framework 2019 70 
Annex III: Organizations and Funding Requirements 87 
For the purpose of the 2019 Joint Response Plan, the term ‘affected populations’ refers to the 
entire population impacted by the crisis, including host communities. People or populations ‘in 
need’ refer to a sub-set of the affected population who have been assessed to be in need of 
protection interventions or humanitarian assistance as a result of the crisis. ‘Target population’ 
refers to those people in need who are specifically targets of support interventions and assistance 
activities contained in this response plan. 
The Government of Bangladesh refers to the Rohingya as “Forcibly Displaced Myanmar Nationals”. 
The UN system refers to this population as Rohingya refugees, in line with the applicable international 
framework. In this Joint Response Plan document, both terms are used, as appropriate, to refer to 
the same population. 

AAP Accountability to Affected Population 
AFD Armed Forces Division 
AWD Acute Watery Diarrhoea 
BSFP Blanket Supplementary Feeding Programmes 
BRAC Bangladesh Rural Advancement Committee 
CFS Child Friendly Spaces 
CIC Camp-in-Charge 
CMR Clinical Management of Rape 
CP Child Protection 
CPIMS Child Protection Information Management System 
CPP Cyclone Preparedness Programme 
CwC Communicating with Communities 
DC Deputy Commissioner 
DG Director General 
DPHE Department of Public Health Engineering 
DRC Danish Refugee Council 
DSS Department of Social Services 
ETS Emergency Telecommunications Sector 
FCN Family Counting Number 
FTS Financial Tracking Service 
GBV Gender-Based Violence 
GFD General Food Distribution 
GiHA Gender in Humanitarian Action 
GoB Government of Bangladesh 
IHP International Humanitarian Partnership 
IM Information Management 
INGO International Non-Governmental Organization 
IOM International Organization for Migration 
ISCG Inter-Sector Coordination Group 
IYCF Infant and Young Child Feeding 
JICA Japan International Cooperation Agency 
JRP Joint Response Plan 
LGED Local Government Engineering Department 
LPG Liquid Petroleum Gas 
MAM Moderate Acute Malnutrition 
MHPSS Mental Health and Psychosocial Support 
MoDMR Ministry of Disaster Management and Relief 
MoFA Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
MoHA Ministry of Home Affairs 
MoHFW Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
MoPME Ministry of Primary and Mass Education 
MSNA Multi-Sector Needs Assessment 
NFI Non-Food Items 
NGO Non-Governmental Organization 
NGOAB Non-Governmental Organization Affairs Bureau 
NPM Needs and Population Monitoring 
NTF National Task Force 
OTP Outpatient Therapeutic Programme 
PERU Protection Emergency Response Unit 
PLW Pregnant and Lactating Women 
PSEA Protection against Sexual Exploitation and Abuse 
PSS Psychosocial Support 
PWG Protection Working Group / Sector 
RCO Resident Coordinator’s Office 
REVA Refugee influx Emergency Vulnerability Assessment 
RRRC Refugee Relief and Repatriation Commissioner 
SAM Severe Acute Malnutrition 
SEG Strategic Executive Group 
SIMEX Simulation Exercise 
SMEP Site Management and Engineering Project 
SMS Site Management Support 
SMSD Site Management and Site Development 
SO Strategic Objective 
SOP Standard Operating Procedures 
SSWG Safe Spaces for Women and Girls 
TDK Tie-Down Kits 
TSFP Targeted Supplementary Feeding Programme 
UASC Unaccompanied and Separated Children 
UNDP United Nations Development Programme 
UNFPA United Nations Population Fund 
UNHCR United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees 
UNICEF United Nations International Children's Emergency Fund 
UNO Upazila Nirbahi Officer 
USK Upgrade Shelter Kits 
WASH Water, Sanitation and Hygiene 
WBK Wall-Bracing Kits 
WFP World Food Programme 
WG Working Group 
WHO World Health Organization 
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS 
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS

Foreword CO-CHAIRS OF THE STRATEGIC EXECUTIVE GROUP 
FOREWORD 
CO-CHAIRS OF THE STRATEGIC EXECUTIVE GROUP 
Since August 2017, under the leadership of the Government of Bangladesh, rapid and effective humanitarian action 
has saved many lives, met critical needs and protected nearly one million Rohingya refugees while also responding to 
impacts on affected host communities. While much has been achieved, the Rohingya crisis in Bangladesh has not fully 
stabilized. 
The Government and people of Bangladesh continue to demonstrate historic generosity in welcoming the Rohingya 
from Myanmar. The international community has also responded with extraordinary solidarity. This must continue. The 
2019 Joint Response Plan will be the vehicle for mobilizing critically needed support for the humanitarian response for 
the Rohingya refugees. 
The Joint Response Plan sets out a comprehensive programme shaped around three strategic objectives – deliver 
protection, provide life-saving assistance and foster social cohesion. The Plan covers all humanitarian sectors and 
addresses key cross-cutting issues, including protection and gender mainstreaming. The Plan will also strengthen 
emergency preparedness and response for weather-related risks and natural disasters, with a focus on community 
engagement. 
Priorities for the coming year include supporting strengthened government leadership and accountability, including 
in the camps, and the effective participation of the refugee community in decisions affecting their lives. This calls for 
empowering women in leadership roles and an inclusive approach, bearing in mind the community includes many 
people with disabilities, mental health issues and other specific needs. Delivering on commitments to localization of the 
response through the strategic transfer of skills, capacities and resources in addition to relying on local capacities where 
they exist is also a priority. 
In 2019, the Government of Bangladesh and UNHCR will accelerate the ongoing joint verification exercise that will 
register the Rohingya and provide them with individual documentation, in many cases for the first time. More accurate 
data, disaggregated by age, sex, gender and other diversity factors, will facilitate planning and targeting of assistance 
and services, while biometric enrolment will strengthen the integrity of delivery. 
The Rohingya refugee crisis is having important socio-economic consequences for nearby host communities, including 
rapid environmental degradation and the loss of forest resources, which has negatively affected livelihoods. The 2019 
Joint Response Plan includes important activities to mitigate these impacts. The World Bank, the Asian Development 
Bank and bilateral development actors have increased their programming significantly, although most interventions will 
only become visible to people living in the area in 2020. 
The Rohingya in Bangladesh have faced systematic discrimination in Myanmar over several decades, including the 
denial of citizenship. They are now stateless refugees living in a congested, fragile area that is prone to natural 
disasters. They fled horrifying atrocities, which an independent United Nations fact-finding mission concluded were 
serious crimes under international law. Despite this, many Rohingya refugees see voluntary return to Myanmar, when the 
right conditions are in place, as the solution to their plight. 
Return to Myanmar must be voluntary, safe, dignified and, importantly, sustainable, so that the decades-long cycle of 
displacement is finally broken. The Government of Myanmar has committed to creating conditions conducive for return, 
including through bilateral agreements with the Government of Bangladesh and under a tripartite Memorandum of 
Understanding with UNHCR and UNDP. These efforts are ongoing in Myanmar. 
We are confident that the 2019 Joint Response Plan provides a solid framework for ensuring protection, delivering 
assistance effectively and building community cohesion, as well as the foundation for collaboration, coordination and 
synergies within the humanitarian community, with development partners and with the Government of Bangladesh. 
Mia Seppo 
UN Resident Coordinator 
Bangladesh 
Steven Corliss 
Representative 
UNHCR Bangladesh 
Giorgi Gigauri 
Chief of Mission 
IOM Bangladesh

Camp 23 
Camp 26 
Camp 4 
Camp 27 
Camp 24 
Camp 25 
Camp 15 
Camp 17 
Camp 8E 
Camp 14 
Camp 7 
Camp 19 
Camp 13 
Camp 18 Camp 9 
Camp 5 
Camp 8W 
Camp 12
Camp 1E 
Camp 22 
Camp 3 
Camp 16 
Camp 10 
Camp 20 
Camp 1W
Camp 11 
Camp 6 
Choukhali 
Camp 2E 
Camp 2W 
Camp 20 Extension 
Camp 21 
Camp 4 Extension 
Kutupalong RC 
Nayapara RC 
Camp 24 / Leda 
33,540 
Camp 23 / Shamlapur 
10,960 
Camp 16 / Bagghona / Potibonia 
21,790 
Camp 15 / Jamtoli 
49,440 
Camp 14 / Hakimpara 
31,920 
Camp 21 / Chakmarkul 
12,250
Camp 22 / Unchiprang 
22,210 
Kutupalong Balukhali Expansion Site 
628,500 
Camp 27 / Jadimura 
14,270 
Camp 26 / Nayapara 
41,040 
Camp 25 / Alikhali 
9,500 
Bay of 
Bengal 
M Y A N M A R 
Teknaf 
Ukhiya 
Naikhongchhari 
Ghandung 
Baharchhara 
Nhilla 
Teknaf 
Whykong 
Jalia 
Palong 
Raja Palong 
Palong Khali 
Nayapara RC 
26,930 Roads 
Union and Camp boundary 
Highways 
Settlement in camp 
with host community 
Building in host community 
Settlement in camp 
Myanmar 
0 1.25 2.5 K m 
BANGLADESH: COX’S BAZAR REFUGEE POPULATION AS OF 31 DECEMBER 2018

PART I: OVERVIEW AND 2019 
RESPONSE STRATEGY 
zzOverview of the Crisis and Needs 
zzProtection Framework for Humanitarian Response 
zz2019 Response Strategy 
zzCoordination and Monitoring 
zzThe New Way of Working 
zzCross-Cutting issues 
zzPeople Targeted by Sector 
Photo Credit: UNICEF / Patrick Brown / 2017

USD 920.5 million required in 2019 to maintain priority response eorts. 
Number of people who need humanitarian assistance 
Total population In Need (disaggregated) Breakdown by population type 
4% 
1.2M 
REFUGEES IN CAMPS REFUGEES IN HOST 
COMMUNITIES 
BANGLADESHI HOST 
COMMUNITIES 
CHILDREN (<18 YEARS) ADULTS (18-59 YEARS) ELDERLY (>59 YEARS) 
55% 41% 72% 1% 27% 
. 
. 340,800 girls 
342,500 boys 
281,900 women 
230,900 men 
23,300 women 
23,000 men 
.. 
899,300 people 
7,200 people 
683,300 people 512,800 people 335,900 people 
. 
. 
46,300 people 
Rohingya Refugees (age and gender disaggregated) 
CHILDREN (0-4 YEARS) CHILDREN (5-11 YEARS) CHILDREN (12-17 YEARS) 
18% 23% 14% 
163,200 people 208,500 people 127,000 people 
ADULTS (18-59 YEARS) ELDERLY (>59 YEARS) 
41% 4% 
371,700 people 36,300 people 
. 81,600 girls 
. 81,600 boys 
. 99,700 girls 
. 108,800 boys 
. 63,500 girls 
. 63,500 boys 
. 208,500 women 
. 163,200 men 
. 18,100 women 
. 18,200 men 
0 300000 600000 900000 1200000 1500000 
N/A N/A 
347,590 347,590 
1.1 1.1 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
580,900 N/A 
1.2 
462,370 696,400 
1.2 1.2 
1.2 1.2 
1.2 1.2 
1 1 
1.2 1.2 
1.2 
0 50000000 100000000 150000000 200000000 250000000 300000000 
CwC 
Food Security 
WASH 
Shelter 
Site Mgmt. 
Health 
Protection 
CP/GBV 
Education 
Nutrition 
Coordination 
Logistics 
$255 
$ 128.8 
$ 88.7 
$ 85.9 
$ 59.5 
$ 48.1 
$ 11 
$ 4.2 
$ 2.8 
Emergency $ 1.1 
Telcomm 
$ 98.7 
$ 136.7 
People in need 
*Population data according to the planning period 
FINANCIAL REQUIREMENT BY SECTOR PEOPLE TARGETED VS IN NEED 
USD 920.5 million required in 2019 to maintain priority response eorts. 
Number of people who need humanitarian assistance 
Total population In Need (disaggregated) Breakdown by population type 
4% 
1.2M 
REFUGEES IN CAMPS REFUGEES IN HOST 
COMMUNITIES 
BANGLADESHI HOST 
COMMUNITIES 
CHILDREN (<18 YEARS) ADULTS (18-59 YEARS) ELDERLY (>59 YEARS) 
55% 41% 72% 1% 27% 
. 
. 340,800 girls 
342,500 boys 
281,900 women 
230,900 men 
23,300 women 
23,000 men 
.. 
899,300 people 
7,200 people 
683,300 people 512,800 people 335,900 people 
. 
. 
46,300 people 
Rohingya Refugees (age and gender disaggregated) 
CHILDREN (0-4 YEARS) CHILDREN (5-11 YEARS) CHILDREN (12-17 YEARS) 
18% 23% 14% 
163,200 people 208,500 people 127,000 people 
ADULTS (18-59 YEARS) ELDERLY (>59 YEARS) 
41% 4% 
371,700 people 36,300 people 
. 81,600 girls 
. 81,600 boys 
. 99,700 girls 
. 108,800 boys 
. 63,500 girls 
. 63,500 boys 
. 208,500 women 
. 163,200 men 
. 18,100 women 
. 18,200 men 
0 300000 600000 900000 1200000 1500000 
N/A N/A 
347,590 347,590 
1.1 1.1 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
580,900 N/A 
1.2 
462,370 696,400 
1.2 1.2 
1.2 1.2 
1.2 1.2 
1 1 
1.2 1.2 
1.2 
0 50000000 100000000 150000000 200000000 250000000 300000000 
CwC 
Food Security 
WASH 
Shelter 
Site Mgmt. 
Health 
Protection 
CP/GBV 
Education 
Nutrition 
Coordination 
Logistics 
$255 
$ 128.8 
$ 88.7 
$ 85.9 
$ 59.5 
$ 48.1 
$ 11 
$ 4.2 
$ 2.8 
Emergency $ 1.1 
Telcomm 
$ 98.7 
$ 136.7 
People in need 
*Population data according to the planning period 
FINANCIAL REQUIREMENT BY SECTOR PEOPLE TARGETED VS IN NEED 
BANGLADESH: POPULATION IN NEED AND FUNDING REQUIREMENTS 
OVERALL POPULATION IN NEED 
FUNDING REQUIREMENTS and PEOPLE TARGETED by SECTOR 

10 
PART I: OVERVIEW AND 2019 RESPONSE 
STRATEGY 
Overview of the Crisis and Needs 
1. The Rohingya people have faced decades of systematic discrimination, statelessness and targeted 
violence in Rakhine State, Myanmar. Such persecution has forced Rohingya women, girls, boys 
and men into Bangladesh for many years, with significant spikes following violent attacks in 1978, 
1991-1992, and again in 2016. Yet it was August 2017 that triggered by far the largest and fastest 
refugee influx into Bangladesh. Since then, an estimated 745,000 Rohingya—including more than 
400,000 children—have fled into Cox’s Bazar. The immediate cause of their flight was described by 
the UN-mandated Independent International Fact-Finding Mission on Myanmar as a “widespread and 
systematic attack on [civilians]” including “murder, imprisonment, enforced disappearance, torture, 
rape, sexual slavery and other forms of sexual violence, persecution, and enslavement” with “elements 
of extermination and deportation” as well as “systematic oppression and discrimination [that] may also 
amount to the crime of apartheid.”1 
2. As of January 2019, over 900,000 stateless Rohingya refugees reside in Ukhiya and Teknaf Upazilas. 
The vast majority lives in 34 extremely congested camps. The largest single site, the Kutupalong- 
Balukhali Expansion Site, hosts approximately 626,500 Rohingya. While most arrived between August 
and December 2017, arrivals have continued since then: more than 16,000 Rohingya have arrived 
since January 2018.2 From the outset of the crisis, the Government of Bangladesh has saved the lives 
of nearly one million Rohingya refugees / Forcibly Displaced Myanmar Nationals by keeping its borders 
open and leading the humanitarian response in close collaboration with the humanitarian community. 
In support of government efforts, the humanitarian community rapidly scaled up operations to provide 
life-saving protection and assistance to both Rohingya and Bangladeshis in affected host communities. 
1. A/HRC/39/64, 2018, Report of the Independent International Fact-Finding Mission on Myanmar, p.16, paragraph 88. Available at: https://www.ohchr.org/Documents/HRBodies/
HRCouncil/FFM-Myanmar/A_HRC_39_64.docx 
2. ISCG, 10 Jan. 2018, Situation Report Rohingya Crisis, Cox’s Bazar. Available at: https://www.humanitarianresponse.info/en/operations/bangladesh/document/situation-report-
rohingya-crisis-coxs-bazar-10-january-2019 
PART I: OVERVIEW AND RESPONSE STRATEGY 
The Government of Bangladesh has kept its borders open to fleeing Rohingya and leads the 
humanitarian response. The people of Bangladesh continue to show exceptional hospitality in the 
face of human tragedy on a massive scale. In keeping with its national policies, the Government 
of Bangladesh refers to these Rohingya as “Forcibly Displaced Myanmar Nationals” in the present 
context. The UN system refers to this population as Rohingya refugees, in line with the applicable 
international framework for protection and solutions, as well as the resulting accountabilities for the 
countries of origin and asylum in addition to the international community as a whole. These terms 
refer to the same population. 
100,000 
200,000 
300,000 
400,000 
500,000 
600,000 
700,000 
800,000 
900,000 
1,000,000 
June 
July 
August 
15-Sep 
15-Oct 
14-Nov 
17-Dec 
14-Jan 
11-Mar 
15-May 
22-Jul 
10-Oct 
28-Nov 
745,000 new arrivals 
as of 31 Dec 2018. 
Total : 909,000 
31-Dec 
Cumulative Rohingya Refugees - Including pre-influx population

11 
3. More than one year into this multifaceted collaborative response, the situation has gradually begun 
to stabilize. Basic assistance has been provided, living conditions in the camps have improved and 
disaster risk mitigation measures have been largely successful. The environmental impact of the 
influx has been reduced, including by addressing the demand for firewood through provision of liquid 
petroleum gas (LPG) as an alternative cooking fuel. The prevalence of Global Acute Malnutrition, at 
emergency levels in late 2017, has dropped below the emergency threshold (from 19% to 12%), food 
security indicators have improved, immunization coverage has grown to 89%, and women delivering 
in health facilities has risen from 22% to 40%.3 These and other statistics reveal increases in the target 
populations’ access to and trust in service delivery — a trust that must be carefully nurtured in the next 
stage of the response. 
4. Despite progress, the Rohingya remain in an extremely precarious situation. The root causes 
of their plight in Myanmar have not been addressed and their future is yet uncertain. A 2018 
agreement between UNHCR, UNDP and the Government of Myanmar was signed with the aim to 
create conditions conducive to return. In the meantime, these refugees / Forcibly Displaced Myanmar 
Nationals are compelled to rely upon government support and humanitarian aid — as their vulnerabilities 
are aggravated by each new day of exile. These vulnerabilities extend across sectors. For example, 
the entire refugee population received basic emergency shelter kits to help them survive 2018’s 
rainy season; they now require more robust and safer shelters. Around 860,000 refugees regularly 
receive minimum food assistance, yet only 240,000 have opportunities to diversify their diet beyond 
the minimum package of rice, lentils and oil. These opportunities must be expanded to ensure their 
nutrition and health. Approximately 50% of pre-primary and primary learners — as well as 97% of youth 
and adolescents — lack access to quality education or learning opportunities. The power of education 
to break the cycle of poverty, violence and injustice has been well proven. Rohingya refugee children 
and youth need better access to learning opportunities to ensure their capacity to maximize whatever 
solutions materialize for themselves and their families. Similarly, continued investments into WASH, 
health and protection services are also vital. 
5. Refugees’ immediate humanitarian needs are compounded by the extreme traumas that often 
preceded or characterized their displacement. The UN independent fact-finding mission concluded 
that the “scale, brutality and systematic nature” in Rakhine State of “rape, gang-rape, sexual slavery, 
forced nudity, sexual humiliation, mutilation and sexual assault […] frequently followed by the killing 
of victims” indicate “a deliberate strategy to intimidate, terrorise or punish a civilian population […].”4 
Rohingya survivors also bear the burden of uncertainty regarding their future prospects for a safe return 
to Myanmar. This context generates considerable anxiety and distress, with related consequences for 
their trust in external actors. Their yet unmet mental health and psychosocial needs remain critical. 
In addition, the daily strain of their predicament, at both the individual and community levels, is 
exacerbated by their limited access to education and livelihoods. Although refugees continue to 
demonstrate solidarity and engage in efforts to improve their situation, a more focused response is 
required to meet the needs and mental well-being of the most vulnerable among them — particularly 
for the elderly, persons with disabilities, women and children at risk as well as survivors of violence. 
6. Improving access to and the quality of protection and assistance is vital with regard to all refugees, 
and for adolescent girls and women in particular. Across the camps in 2018, consistent reports of 
gender-based violence and abuse underscore the need to strengthen gender-based violence (GBV) 
prevention mechanisms and to increase GBV case management, counter-trafficking programming and 
psychosocial support for children and adults. Community-based protection interventions and efforts 
to ensure safety and security in the camps, including basic requirements such as lighting, presence 
of law enforcement authorities and access to justice, require continuous strengthening by all actors 
in 2019. 
7. There is an urgent need for robust, family-based alternative care arrangements for unaccompanied 
and separated children (UASC), family tracing and reunification as well as support to foster care 
families. Recent research5 provides new insight into the experiences of orphaned and separated 
Rohingya children, and has confirmed that an overwhelming number of children were separated 
from their primary caregivers during attacks and that they either witnessed or have strong reason to 
believe that their parent or caregiver did not survive. This reinforces the need for mental health and 
psychosocial support for children and their caregivers and for support to alternative care arrangements 
and family tracing and reunifications. 
3. ISCG Secretariat, Sept.2018, Mid-Term Review of the 2018 Joint Response Plan, Bangladesh. Available at: https://www.humanitarianresponse.info/sites/www.humanitari- 
anresponse.info/files/documents/files/2018_jrp_mid_term_review_v28.pdf 
4. A/HRC/39/64, 2018, Ibid., p.15, paragraph 79. 
5. Child Protection Sub-Sector, Nov. 2018, UASC Brief, “Understanding Family Separation Amongst Rohingya Refugees”, Cox’s Bazaar, Bangladesh. 
PART I: OVERVIEW AND RESPONSE STRATEGY

12 
8. The joint Government of Bangladesh-UNHCR verification exercise started in mid-2018 and will 
continue in 2019. This exercise forms an integral part of moving from the initial emergency phase to 
a more sustainable response. The results of the verification exercise will provide the Government with 
a better overview of the displaced population as well as much needed identity documentation for the 
refugees / Forcibly Displaced Myanmar Nationals themselves. It will also allow the response as a whole 
to better identify and target the most pressing needs and vulnerabilities. The outcome will provide 
more accurate data (disaggregated by age, sex, gender and other diversity factors such as disability). 
9. Displacement from Myanmar has almost tripled the total population in Ukhiya and Teknaf Upazilas, 
with sizable consequences for the environment and livelihoods of Bangladeshi residents — as well 
as significant new development opportunities that have yet to be maximized. District infrastructure, 
including health and water services, have been extended by the District Government to support 
refugees / Forcibly Displaced Myanmar Nationals. This critical contribution to the humanitarian response 
places extensive pressure on those systems. The forced displacement of nearly one million vulnerable 
people from Myanmar has had a significant impact on fragile forest and land resources. While the rapid 
population increase has brought notable economic opportunities to segments of the local population, 
the influx has also led to higher inflation and a sharp drop in daily wages due to the increased supply 
of unskilled labour. There is a need to continue addressing concerns of the local population under the 
leadership of the Government and the local authorities. 
10. This significant protection crisis is exacerbated by its location in an area prone to natural disasters. 
Refugee camps and surrounding areas are especially fragile and could be decimated by severe 
weather events that are common in the region. It is essential to continue to build on Bangladesh’s 
effective disaster response mechanisms and risk mitigation efforts within and around camp areas, to 
enhance resilience to deal with weather related events, and to ensure adequate contingency planning 
for natural disasters. 
11. Congestion remains the central challenge for the refugee response across all sectors, with space 
constraints resulting in poor living conditions in locations at risk of landslide and flood. This context 
amplifies a myriad protection issues. Insufficient space combines with poor access roads into the 
more remote camps to restrict humanitarian capacity to provide adequate services where needed. 
The insufficient open spaces and shade for essential recreation and community-based cohesion 
activities, to address the psychosocial needs of refugees, stifle their natural coping mechanisms and 
can exacerbate protection risks, especially for women and children. The Government of Bangladesh 
has expanded the available land to a total of over 6,500 acres in the Ukhiya and Teknaf Upazilas, 
including 3,700 acres for the Kutupalong-Balukhali Expansion Site. The Government has also overseen 
the relocation of over 45,000 refugees / Forcibly Displaced Myanmar Nationals within camps or into 
newly extended camps in 2018. However, as the overall land resources in these areas remain scarce, 
it has not been possible to ease the congestion to meet basic international humanitarian standards 
in locations that are safe from weather exigencies, are easily accessible and provide opportunities 
for improved living conditions. Congestion also impacts the provision of necessary services where 
confidentiality is key, such as case management. 
12. Incidents of tension and violence have been observed, both within the camps and between 
refugees and host communities. These incidents reflect evolving social dynamics in camps and 
surrounding communities, which have changed significantly since the crisis began. Multiple factors 
are driving the changes, including conflicts and grievances of both individuals and groups that are 
exacerbated by contextual circumstances such as extremely congested conditions in the camps and 
PART I: OVERVIEW AND RESPONSE STRATEGY 
The Government of Bangladesh has identified Bhashan Char – a large silt island in the Bay of Bengal 
– as a site to potentially relocate over 100,000 Rohingya refugees / Forcibly Displaced Myanmar 
Nationals from Cox’s Bazar. The Government has proposed this relocation to Bhashan Char, which 
is part of Noakhali District, as a means of decongesting the heavily overcrowded settlements in 
Cox’s Bazar. The UN continues to engage constructively with the Government of Bangladesh on 
the plan, seeking to ascertain its safety, suitability and desirability, including with regards to related 
protection considerations, the availability of essential services as well as environmental and socioeconomic 
sustainability. Transparent engagement with the Rohingya community is also essential to 
alleviate anxiety and facilitate the relocation process, if the plan goes forward. The JRP 2019 does 
not including planning or requirements for Bhashan Char. 

13 
limited opportunities for education and skills development. Under the Government’s leadership, the 
2019 response will seek to maximize opportunities for social cohesion. This concept recognizes 
the importance of peaceful coexistence of communities within the camps as well as between host 
communities and refugees. 
13. Under the coordination of the Government of Bangladesh, notable advances have been made 
in streamlining regulatory requirements for humanitarian access. Humanitarian partners, however, 
continue to report operational challenges related to necessary clearances and visas. Successful 
mitigation measures include the introduction of the Humanitarian Pass by the Ministry of Disaster 
Management and Relief, which allows authorities to identify internwational staff authorized to access 
the camps. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs has extended the duration of programme permissions (FD7s) 
from three to six month periods for emergency-related activities and issuing more visas for international 
staff through FD7s. Operational partners continue to report operational hindrances related to complex 
clearance processes at different levels (i.e. District, Upazila and camp). The Government continues to 
cooperate to identify ways of maximizing efficiency while also addressing its need for monitoring and 
oversight. Continued joint efforts along these lines will be critical to the success of the response. 
14. Many Rohingya refugees consistently express their desire to return to Myanmar in safety and 
dignity. They also articulate ongoing concerns about the security situation in Rakhine State, their lack 
of recognized Myanmar citizenship and other restrictions there on their rights to freedom of movement, 
and access to livelihoods, health and education. In addition, they emphasize the importance of being 
allowed to return to their places of origin or other preferred locations. 
15. The international community is working closely with Governments on both sides of the border to 
assist them in working towards voluntary, safe and dignified returns — understanding that only 
sustainable returns can break the decades-long cycle of displacement. While the obligation to 
create conditions conducive to such return rests with the Government of Myanmar, humanitarian actors 
in Bangladesh stand ready to help. For example, the 2018 Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) 
between the Government of Myanmar, UNHCR and UNDP is intended to ensure that refugees receive 
information on the situation in their places of origin. The MoU provides for independent assessments 
conducted in villages in Northern Rakhine State and, when possible, go-and-see visits whereby refugees 
would visit their home villages, other areas where they may choose to return, and transit facilities in 
Myanmar. These assessments and visits will allow them to have objective information about reception 
arrangements and prospects for reintegration. When conditions permit returns, the international 
community will be ready to provide support through return packages and transportation assistance, in 
collaboration with both Governments. After the refugees go home, the international community must 
have unhindered access to returnees to monitor their safety and reintegration conditions. All sectors 
have capacity to provide relevant support in preparation for voluntary repatriation. In a scenario where 
large numbers of refugees would seek support with return to Myanmar, the Joint Response Plan would 
be reviewed and updated to ensure adequate resources are available for this purpose. 
16. In the meantime, timely funding is required to meet life-saving and humanitarian needs, as well as 
to mitigate impacts on host communities. There is no doubt that the generous combined support 
of the Government and donors has saved lives and stabilized the situation. However, the continued 
urgency of the needs should not be underestimated. Resource mobilization efforts will be stepped up 
to assist people in need, both affected host communities and refugees / Forcibly Displaced Myanmar 
Nationals, as well as to support the authorities in their efforts to cope with this crisis. Financial tracking 
to enable a clear view of the status and priorities in the response, including in regards to donations 
outside of the JRP, will also be improved. 
17. The range of actors and funding streams in the response have diversified, galvanizing new 
partnerships and collaboration as envisaged by the New Way of Working6. Given the urgent 
need to provide basic services, the World Bank (WB) and the Asian Development Bank (ADB) have 
proposed grant financing at the request of the Government of Bangladesh. In July 2018, the WB 
President announced a grant of USD 480 million (including USD 80 million loan taken in charge by 
Canada) to the Government of Bangladesh under its IDA18 Regional Sub-Window for Refugees and 
Host Communities over a period of three years. The proposed ADB amount is USD 200 million to 
support investments in basic infrastructure to address the immediate needs of the displaced persons. 
6.Former UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and the heads of UNICEF, UNHCR, WHO, OCHA, WFP, FAO, UNFPA and UNDP, with the endorsement of the World Bank 
and the International Organization for Migration, signed at the World Humanitarian Summit a "Commitment to Action" document, in which they agreed on a New Way of 
Working in crises. Its aim is not only to meet humanitarian needs, but also to reduce needs, risks and vulnerability over time. For more information: https://agendaforhumanity.
org/initiatives/5358 
PART I: OVERVIEW AND RESPONSE STRATEGY

14 
The humanitarian community will continue to support the Government of Bangladesh and liaise with 
development actors linked to development planning in the whole of Cox’s Bazar District. 
18. Under the leadership of the Government of Bangladesh, the humanitarian community has 
engaged in needs assessments, consultations and strategic planning, which has culminated in this 
prioritised Joint Response Plan for 2019. The process has entailed ongoing bilateral and multilateral 
consultations at the District level with the Deputy Commissioner (DC), the Refugee Relief and 
Repatriation Commissioner (RRRC), with sectors and agencies engaging relevant line Departments and 
Ministries (including the Department of Public Health Engineering, the Local Government Engineering 
Department (LGED), the Forestry Department, the Civil Surgeon’s Office, and the Ministry of Women’s 
and Children’s Affairs. Other key coordination efforts connect humanitarian actors and the Armed Force 
Division (AFD). At the national level, the Strategic Executive Group manages the engagement with the 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and its National Task Force, as well as the Ministry of Disaster Management 
and Relief and relevant line Ministries on the technical issues they lead, including the nature and 
design of interventions, and sector standards. A more detailed needs overview can be found in the 
Mid-Term Review of the JRP 2018,7 undertaken in August and September, which contributed to the 
strategic planning process for 2019. 
Protection Framework for Humanitarian Response 
1. The Rohingya humanitarian crisis is a protection crisis at its core. The Rohingya are refugees who 
have fled “gross human rights violations undoubtedly amounting to the gravest crimes under 
international law,” according to a 2018 report by the UN’s Independent International Fact-Finding 
Mission on Myanmar.8 In addition to the harms they endure as refugees, the Rohingya are also 
stateless. The root causes of — as well as the solution — to their plight are to be found in Myanmar. 
2. The Rohingya refugees consistently express their desire to return home when this becomes 
possible in safety and dignity. Recognizing their right to return, the international community 
has committed to support their repatriation from Bangladesh when conditions are sustainably 
conducive to voluntary, safe and dignified returns in Myanmar. Until that time, Rohingya refugees 
continue to require protection and assistance from the Government of Bangladesh with support from 
humanitarian actors. 
3. The 2019 Joint Response Plan ensures that the Rohingya humanitarian response is shaped around 
a common analytical framework that aims to achieve protection and solutions outcomes for all 
refugee girls, boys, women and men. All programming decisions and collective interventions to save 
lives, ensure safety and security, provide basic services, alleviate suffering and restore their dignity 
derive from this common analysis of risks, vulnerabilities and specific needs. Engaging refugees 
and enabling them to participate in decisions affecting their lives and communities is essential, as 
is a holistic and inclusive approach that takes into account the perspectives and needs of the host 
community. This means that protection is central to this humanitarian response. 
4. In 2017-2018, the Government of Bangladesh and humanitarian partners jointly coordinated 
to provide urgent and essential services. These efforts must now be taken forward focusing on 
increasing quality aspects, in order to restore and enhance dignity, empower communities, provide 
specialized protection and humanitarian assistance to increase refugees’ resilience, mitigate the onset 
of potentially harmful coping mechanisms and enhance community-based protection mechanisms; all 
with the aim of achieving sustainable protection and solutions. 
5. Preparing refugees for solutions in the short- and mid-terms by building their resilience and enhancing 
their confidence, for example, through opportunities to learn and develop portable skills is a key 
priority. Such programmes will combat potentially harmful coping mechanism while in Bangladesh 
and make future returns more sustainable. The Protection Framework for Humanitarian Response 
leverages refugees’ capacities, who can contribute to their own protection and solutions through 
active participation and engaging of all members of the Rohingya community, including vulnerable 
groups and people with specific needs. 
7.ISCG Secretariat, Sept.2018, Mid-Term Review of the 2018 Joint Response Plan, Bangladesh. Available at: https://www.humanitarianresponse.info/sites/www.humanitarianresponse.
info/files/documents/files/2018_jrp_mid_term_review_v28.pdf 
8.A/HRC/39/64, 2018, Report of the Independent International Fact-Finding Mission on Myanmar, p.18, paragraph 100. Available at: https://www.ohchr.org/en/hrbodies/hrc/ 
myanmarFFM/Pages/ReportoftheMyanmarFFM.aspx
PART I: OVERVIEW AND RESPONSE STRATEGY

15 
6. To mitigate the effects of the Rohingya crisis and ensure a strong humanitarian response the 
humanitarian actors have carried out integrated analysis accross sectors, recognizing that a number 
of key protection, child protection (CP) and gender-based violence (GBV) risks can be best prevented, 
mitigated and/or responded to through food security, access to livelihoods, health, WASH, education 
and camp management and development interventions. 
7. An inclusive and more participatory approach to assistance throughout the response will be 
prioritized to adequately address identified needs, and enable refugees to exercise their basic 
rights and enjoy their entitlements to equal humanitarian assistance. This will be done by protection 
actors in close coordination with all service providers, the Site Management Sector and Campin-
Charge (CiC) officials designated with camp management responsibility. The aim is to develop 
and strengthen community participation, ensuring inclusion and access to quality services through 
enhanced outreach and use of existing community-based protection mechanisms. The specific needs 
of children and youth, persons with disabilities, older persons, chronically or severely ill persons, 
persons living with HIV/AIDS, as well as female-headed households will be given special attention. 
8. Youth, men and women committees will be established to enhance refugees’ direct participation 
and community outreach volunteers will sensitize the community in order to achieve meaningful 
participation in decision-making related to humanitarian assistance. This should enable refugees’ 
concerns related in particular to safety and security in the camps, healthcare services, food and WASH 
to be better analysed and responded to through increased inter-sector synergies. For example, the 
Protection Working Group will work closely with the Health Sector in strengthening accessibility 
and acceptability of healthcare services, including for persons with specific needs and those with 
disabilities and reduced mobility. Emphasis will also be placed on strengthening awareness-raising 
and emergency preparedness and response through a community-based approach and mobile 
protection teams, to ensure the impacts of seasonal weather-related risks and natural disasters on 
persons at heightened risk are minimized. 
9. Evidence-based protection monitoring programmes will be scaled up in order to deepen 
understanding and improve the analysis of risks, threats, vulnerabilities and incidents, as well as 
patterns and trends. A more thorough and in-depth analysis, that seeks to unravel the multi-layered 
social complexities and dynamics, including through sociological and anthropological angles, will 
guide protection mainstreaming interventions across the entire response. 
10. Sustained advocacy efforts should continue to address the concerns of the Rohingya refugees, 
based on regular consultations with representative male and female community members of different 
ages and background, and in close coordination with all competent government authorities. Refugee 
men, women, boys and girls should have access to all the information they need, and should be 
able to participate in all decisions that affect their lives and their future, including with regards to 
possible solutions, potential relocation and return movements. Protection, Site Management and 
Communication with Communities actors will play an increasing role in informing the response in this 
regard, in particular by sharing feedback from refugees more systematically with other actors at camp 
level. Community mobilization efforts need to be scaled up, including through the rapid establishment 
of inclusive camp governance structures, community-based child protection committees, the 
prioritization of community centres, recreational and protection spaces, including community centres, 
adolescent hubs, child-friendly spaces and safe spaces for women and girls, as critical infrastructures 
in the camps in order to empower and strengthen the resilience of the refugee community and 
mitigate risks of social tensions. The phased roll-out of elected committees in camps representing 
the community through a transparent and consultative process, will enable refugees to exercise their 
right to participate and influence the design and delivery of programmes at all stages of the response. 
Reinforcing the community-based approach is, therefore, a key strategic priority for 2019; it will put 
refugees at the centre of the response, ensure their voices are heard and enhance humanitarian 
actors' accountability to both refugees and host communities. 
11. To track and respond to the overall trajectory of child protection by key issue and geographical 
severity, a situation and alert system will be established to enable child protection partners to 
receive alerts of any alarming changes in the situation for children from a range of actors. In addition, 
an integrated analysis, making use of available datasets including those from food security, education 
and health, will enable partners to make significant shifts in the programmatic response to boost 
efficiency, effectiveness and coverage. Across refugee and host communities, girls and boys with 
heightened protection risks should be identified and provided with specialized case management 
services, including regular assistance by the Government. For unaccompanied children, identification 
PART I: OVERVIEW AND RESPONSE STRATEGY

16 
and documentation, family tracing services, case management and provision of appropriate alternative 
family or community-based care will be scaled up and strengthened. The child protection actors 
will strive to support child survivors of sexual and gender-based violence in coordination with the 
GBV Sub-Sector. The capacity of social workers will continue to be built through learning strategies 
including case management training, mentoring and coaching. 
12. 52% of Rohingya refugees are women and girls.9 Many of them have been exposed to widespread 
and severe forms of sexual violence in Myanmar before and during their flight to Bangladesh. Following 
displacement, they continue to be at disproportionate risk of GBV, including domestic and intimate 
partner violence, forced marriage, exploitation and trafficking. For adolescent girls, the risk of GBV is 
exacerbated by a number of factors including cultural practices, insecurity within the camps, limited 
opportunities for self-development and portable skills development for families, and inadequate 
access to education. The conservative social and cultural norms create additional barriers to women’s 
empowerment, freedom, access to, and control over resources. Promoting and embracing gender 
mainstreaming and prevention of GBV will be a priority for all sectors as well as within the humanitarian 
leadership at all levels. 
13. Family structures have been significantly disrupted by violence, separation and the struggle to cope 
with the adverse consequences of forced displacement. As a result, the most vulnerable people, 
such as older persons and persons with disabilities, are often isolated. Older men and women, widows 
in particular, are at heightened risk of violence, abuse and neglect and often have inadequate access 
to essential information, services and protection support. Over 6,100 children have been separated 
from their primary caregiver as a result of the crisis. Persons with disabilities, who suffer from mobility 
and access difficulties, have greater and more specific needs than the overall refugee population and 
they may have suffered greater consequences of forced displacement, during and after flight, due to 
their physical and/or mental impairment heightening their vulnerability. The inclusion of older men and 
women and of persons with disabilities will be prioritized in all aspects of programming and service 
delivery. 
14. There is a strong need to provide specialized mental health and psychosocial support for 
refugees, as psychological distress continues to be a salient concern for all refugees, including for 
children and other groups with special needs, many of whom experienced or witnessed violence 
in Myanmar. It is estimated that 17% of children are suffering severe mental health impacts. Beyond 
delivering high quality stabilizing support, there is an urgent need to scale up more structured and 
targeted psychosocial support while also creating conditions and innovative solutions to address 
aid-dependency, idleness, hopelessness and helplessness which have harmful impacts on individual 
well-being and community resilience. 
15. A situation of protracted statelessness imposed over generations has rendered the Rohingya 
people extremely vulnerable. This vulnerability has been compounded by the recent severe 
traumatic experiences they went through before, during and after their flight to Bangladesh. There is 
an urgent need for the international community to support the Government of Myanmar in addressing 
the issue of legal status and documentation of the Rohingya people in Rakhine State, most precisely, 
restoration of citizenship, in order to end decades of deprivation and attain sustainable solutions. 
Sustained advocacy efforts are also required to recognize the legal status of refugees and address 
existing protection concerns, in line with the protection framework to mitigate risks of exploitation and 
abuse in particular. 
9. RRRC-UNHCR Family Counting. 
PART I: OVERVIEW AND RESPONSE STRATEGY

17 
2019 RESPONSE STRATEGY 
Strategic Objectives 
SO 1. Collectively deliver 
protection to refugee women, men, 
girls and boys 
Empower individuals and communities, 
and ensure that all aspects of the response 
contribute to an enabling environment for 
the rights and well-being of aected 
populations 
SO 2. Provide life-saving 
assistance to aected populations 
Improve quality and rationalize services to 
ensure equal access for women, men, 
boys and girls, mainstream disaster risk 
reduction and ensure preparedness for 
natural disaster 
SO 3. Foster social cohesion 
Stabilize and sustain the response in close 
collaboration with the Government of 
Bangladesh, by ensuring access to quality 
services for aected populations including 
host communities, building resilience and 
strengthening capacities, and rehabilitating 
the environment and eco-systems 
1. In 2019, the response to the Rohingya refugee crisis will be implemented in full partnership with 
the Government of Bangladesh, while durable solutions are continuously sought for refugees. The 
Protection Framework for Humanitarian Response recognizes the need for both targeted activities 
by protection actors, such as specific protection interventions for children, as well as all humanitarian 
partners’ commitment to protection and gender mainstreaming, which will continue to be integrated 
and improved across the sectors. The response will focus on enhanced access to services that meet 
minimum standards in all sectors, and for all targeted people in need. The plan includes priority 
interventions that are essential to saving lives and stabilizing the situation of the refugees. 
2. The JRP targets affected populations and people in need in Cox’s Bazar District. This includes 
Rohingya refugees and heavily impacted host communities in the seven Unions in Ukhiya and Teknaf 
Upazilas of Cox’s Bazar District that are hosting the highest numbers of refugees. 
3. The plan aims to ensure that refugees' voices will be heard, which is essential to making protection 
central to the response, and living conditions including access to education and livelihoods will further 
improve, offering hope for sustainable, dignified lives. The response will sustain assistance for the 
refugee populations and work towards incremental achievement of minimum humanitarian standards. 
Under the leadership of the Government of Bangladesh efforts will also be made to strengthen 
essential service delivery mechanisms through specific projects (including, but not limited to, provision 
of medical supplies, training and staff to the District Health Complex) as well as the leveraging of 
development interventions (including, but not limited to, capacity support to the Bangladeshi Fire 
Service included in the ADB programming, and support to the Upazila administration). Disaster risk 
reduction and the considerations needed to ensure continuity of operations during the monsoon has 
been mainstreamed across sectors, and preparedness and contingency plans are already in place for 
a major cyclone or other natural disaster. In 2019, disaster risk reduction and disaster preparedness 
will build on both achievements and lessons learned during the cyclone and monsoon seasons of 
2018. Across sectors, improved quality of facilities can enhance weather resilience and sustainability. 
4. Within the Protection Framework for Humanitarian Response, the plan focuses on meeting the 
basic needs and restoring the dignity of the refugee population. Rationalization of service delivery 
and new modalities of assistance will be necessary to increase aid efficiency and meet minimum 
standards. Sectors are joining efforts to find different and more creative ways of ensuring that the 
needs of children and youth are met, and that they are not left idle. Targeted interventions for identified 
vulnerable groups such as persons with disabilities, the elderly, the chronically ill and those in need 
of mental of psychosocial support will be strengthened through the implementation of the verification 
exercise providing better data for targeting and through increased outreach activities in the camp. 
PART I: OVERVIEW AND RESPONSE STRATEGY

18 
5. Improved quality and greater rationalization of services will be incrementally implemented across 
the response through macro-settlement and camp-level site planning. Currently, there is an uneven 
spread of services in the camps, which has resulted from the dense and spontaneous character of 
the settlements, difficult terrain and extremely limited access during the initial response phase, when 
immediate needs had to be quickly met. Rationalizing the locations of different services, such as 
learning spaces, nutrition centres, and health posts, will help to ensure everyone can access what 
they need through effective use of the limited space available. A macro settlement planning strategy 
will be rolled out in 2019 that aims to maximize the resources available, under direct supervision and 
monitoring of the Government of Bangladesh. 
6. The macro-planning process aims to improve the layout of the camps for more effective access 
to services and improved living conditions. Services that can be consolidated into multi-use 
facilities will be identified, which will enable community valued public spaces to be identified and 
preserved. Decongestion of the densest camps will be partially enabled, with the plan building on 
existing structures, including centres and markets in the camps. Emphasis will be given to rehabilitating 
the ecological system, strengthening and upgrading riparian corridors and protecting forest. Within 
6,500 acres, a population density of 20m2 per person should be achievable, though this remains well 
below the international minimum standard of 45m2 per person. Based on the macro-plan, camp level 
plans will be developed for the progressive implementation of an improved living environment as far 
as possible within the current constraints. This will be done in close collaboration with the Government 
of Bangladesh, including the Local Government Engineering Department and the Office of the RRRC 
and notably the CiC Officers (CiC). Site management will gradually transition into stronger Government 
ownership through the current system of CiCs overseeing the planning and camp management efforts. 
7. The Joint Response Plan will advance efforts to strengthen the sustainability of the response, 
including by exploring new ways of working with local and development partners. A roadmap to 
localization will be developed in partnership with authorities, national NGOs and civil society, building 
on the outcomes from research and workshops organized by various national organizations in 2018. 
The roadmap will include strategies to pursue capacity-building for national partners in relevant 
areas such as Health and WASH services, as well as further collaboration to facilitate training for 
humanitarian actors and relevant government entities. Civil society has also been actively engaged in 
the development of the objectives of the JRP, both within the Strategic Executive Group as well as at 
the sector level in Cox’s Bazar. 
8. Protection against Sexual Exploitation and Abuse (PSEA) by humanitarian workers is priority for the 
Rohingya response. SEA undermines the integrity of humanitarian work, inflicting significant harm on 
vulnerable people, who we are mandated to protect under the principle of “do no harm”. Eradicating 
such acts represents a critical element of accountability to refugees and affected host communities. 
Towards this aim, the humanitarian community is implementing a PSEA Strategy approved by the Heads 
of Sub-Offices Group (HoSOG) and Strategic Executive Group (SEG) and disseminated to operational 
actors in the response. The implementation of the PSEA strategy will continue in 2019, focusing on 
enhanced community awareness as well as mapping of existing complaint mechanisms. Together with 
sectors and agencies, the PSEA Network will create community-based complaint mechanisms in the 
camps, strengthening referrals and inter-agency coordination, involving communities at each stage of 
the process. In addition, the Network will resume the finalization of a joint PSEA training (comprehensive 
of code of conduct and safeguards) for all the humanitarian actors and relevant authorities. 
9. Development actors will help build knowledge and strengthen capacities of national and local 
actors involved with service delivery. Support will be provided to the RRRC, DC, and line Ministries to 
enable them to deliver on their functions and responsibilities. In particular, capacity-building support 
will be provided to the District Health Complex, the Department of Public Health Engineering (DPHE), 
the RRRC and the CiCs responsible for Camp management, the law enforcement authorities, as well 
as the DC and Upazila Nirbahi Offices (UNOs) of Ukhiya and Teknaf. 
PART I: OVERVIEW AND RESPONSE STRATEGY

19 
52 
77 
44 
49 
33 
91 
83 
48 
91 
82 
130 
Teknaf 
Whykong 
Palong 
Khali 
Nhilla 
Sabrang 
Raja Palong 
Haldia Palong 
Jalia 
Palong 
Ratna Palong 
Baharchhara 
Teknaf 
Paurashava 
Number of Partners in both Camp 
& Host Communities 
Camp Boundaries 
Refugee Population by Union 
Number of Partners in Host Communities 
Number of Partners in Camp 
* Including implementing partners reporting to ISCG 4W as of December 2018 
PART I: OVERVIEW AND RESPONSE STRATEGY 
Number of partners by Union*

20 
COORDINATION AND MONITORING 
Coordination 
1. With such a complex set of stakeholders, and with the urgency of the humanitarian situation, clear 
and effective coordination is essential. Coordination will ensure the most efficient and harmonized use 
of resources, and quick identification of gaps, duplications, and operational challenges, so that assistance 
and protection reaches those who need them in a timely way. 
2. The humanitarian response is led and coordinated by the Government of Bangladesh, which 
established a “National Strategy on Myanmar Refugees and Undocumented Myanmar Nationals” in 2013. 
That strategy established the National Task Force (NTF), chaired by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and 
including 29 Ministries and entities, which provides oversight and strategic guidance to the response. 
Following the influx, the Refugee Relief and Repatriation Commissioner (RRRC), under the Ministry of 
Disaster Management and Relief, was mandated to provide operational coordination for all refugees / 
Forcibly Displaced Myanmar Nationals. The DC also continues to play the critical role, and has the primary 
responsibility for operational coordination of the response for Bangladeshi host communities including 
Disaster Risk Reduction. 
3. For the humanitarian agencies, strategic guidance and national level government engagement is 
provided by the Strategic Executive Group (SEG) in Dhaka, co-chaired by the Resident Coordinator, 
IOM and UNHCR. At the District level, the Senior Coordinator leads the Inter-Sector Coordination 
Group, composed of thematic Sector and Working Group Coordinators who represent the humanitarian 
community, ensuring coordination with the RRRC and the DC (including with the Upazila Nirbah Officers 
(UNO) at the Upazila, sub-District level: this includes regular coordination meetings at the Upazila level 
co-chaired by UNOs and ISCG). 
4. The Senior Coordinator has direct reporting lines to the three SEG Co-Chairs based in Dhaka and 
coordinates the response at the level of Cox's Bazar. The Senior Coordinator chairs the Heads of Sub- 
Office Group (HoSOG) which brings together the heads of all UN Agencies and Representatives of the 
international NGO and national NGO community, as well as donor representatives based in Cox’s Bazar. 
The Senior Coordinator also chairs and leads the Inter-Sector Coordination Group (ISCG), and guides the 
response, with the support of a Secretariat. In 2019, in addition to the humanitarian response efforts in 
Bangladeshi 
Host Communities 
ETC 
Coordination Food Security Logistics 
Nutrition 
Protection GBV 
Child Protection Shelter 
Site Mgmt. 
Education Health WASH 
Refugees in Camps 1 4 24 34 49 1 15 28 26 24 28 18 37 
1 4 3 18 15 1 10 14 18 12 17 6 10 
Refugees in 
Host Communities 
1 4 17 32 30 1 13 22 23 17 20 15 18 
1 10 20 30 40+ 
Number of partners 
*Including implementing partners 
50 
JRP appealing partners breakdown 
8 
UN agencies 
28 
International 
NGOs 
23 
International 
NGOs 
14 
National 
NGOs 
11 
National 
NGOs 
Partners 
5 
UN Agencies 
JRP appealing partners breakdown 
with host community interventions 
Partners 39 
PART I: OVERVIEW AND RESPONSE STRATEGY 
Number of partners by sector 
* including implementing partners

21 
the camps, under the leadership of the Government, a coordination mechanism will also be established 
to promote peaceful coexistence between and within communities as well as address host community 
needs. This platform will be led by the Deputy Commissioner with support from the Senior Coordinator 
and the ISCG to ensure a cohesive response, also with the aim of strengthening representation and 
involvement by national civil society partners. The Deputy Commissioner also leads disaster risk reduction 
planning for the whole district. 
5. The Government provides overall leadership and coordination for the humanitarian response. In 
regards to operational coordination, the RRRC co-chairs Sector Coordinators meetings in Cox’s Bazar 
on a regular basis. At the sector level, relevant line Ministries and Departments guide the response, with 
the sectors supporting the mainstreaming of service delivery, as appropriate, by basing coordination 
teams in the relevant government offices. 
6. At the camp level, coordination is led by the Camp-in-Charge officials under the RRRC’s office, who 
are mandated by the Government of Bangladesh to assume camp management responsibilities. 
During the course of 2018, additional camps were formally demarcated, and boundaries drawn, enabling 
camp management oversight of the vast majority of the Rohingya settlements within a total of 34 formally 
designated camps at the end of the year. Under the auspices of the Site Management Sector, Site 
Management Support (SMS) Agencies have been deployed in all camps to support the CiC in managing 
the camps. CiCs chair regular camp level coordination meetings, attended by camp level Sector Focal 
Points. These focal points are operational staff of agencies delivering in the camps who oversee and 
coordinate service delivery in their specific technical areas within the boundaries of the camps, which is 
often delivered by multiple agencies. The CiCs liaise closely with all actors and monitor service delivery 
overall in the camps, ensuring gaps and duplications are identified and addressed. 
7. The Camp Management function also entails community outreach and participation, which is done 
in coordination with the Site Management and Protection sectors. As part of the 2019 efforts by the 
Protection and Site Management partners, a new community representation model within the camps 
should progressively be implemented that includes grassroots community organizations and religious 
leaders. In addition, several community groups have been established by CiC, SMS agencies and other 
actors at the camp level to support service delivery and maintenance, and represent groups of the 
population. 
8. Capacity-building support for the RRRC and CiCs will be streamlined in 2019, in close cooperation with 
the Government. Support will be provided to reinforce government leadership in camp-level coordination 
and to make the transition toward strengthened national leadership of site management, based on needs 
and requests. 
9. The ISCG Secretariat hosted an NGO liaison function in the initial phase of the response and 
subsequently fostered the independent Bangladesh Rohingya Response NGO forum which was 
established in June 2018. The NGO Platform aims to bring together more than one hundred local, 
national and international NGOs to enhance coordination, advocacy and partnerships, as well as to help 
widen their humanitarian space in the response. The NGO Platform Coordinator participates in decisionmaking 
and agenda-setting in the coordination fora at all levels, including the Strategic Executive Group, 
the HoSOG and the ISCG. The NGO Platform regularly participates in government-led coordination 
mechanisms, including under the RRRC and the Deputy Commissioner, and helps coordinate with the 
Government's NGO Affairs Bureau. 
10. A gender hub will also become operational in 2019 and will support sectors and humanitarian actors 
to strengthen gender, GBV and PSEA mainstreaming through offering integrated training, awareness 
raising and technical support, building on analysis, tools and capacities in the Gender in Humanitarian 
Action Working Group, the Protection Working Group, the GBV Sub-Sector and the PSEA Network. It will 
promote greater accountability to mainstream gender, GBV and PSEA, and concrete actions by sectors 
and humanitarian actors to address gender equality issues, GBV risks, and the need to further empower 
and support women and girls to be represented and have their voices heard within the communities. The 
Gender Hub will be led through partnership of UN Women with UNFPA and UNHCR. 
11. A country-wide coordination review, including a lesson learnt workshop and a review mission, was 
undertaken in late 2018. The recommendations of the review will be implemented in 2019, in consultation 
with the Government, to ensure a coordination structure that is fit for purpose. The coordination mechanisms 
must ensure that adequate synergy is maintained between all the critical stakeholders, that accountability 
lines are clear, and that common issues of concern are identified and addressed. An overall coherent and 
cohesive humanitarian response and concrete support to various partners and sectors at the Cox's Bazar 
level is enabled through the collaboration of all partners led by the Senior Coordinator and supported by 
the Inter-Sector Coordination Group Secretariat. 
PART I: OVERVIEW AND RESPONSE STRATEGY

22 
Monitoring 
1. A comprehensive monitoring framework for the JRP 2019 has been developed with partners to track 
implementation of the response plan. Outcome statements have been defined against each of the 
Strategic Objectives, and the sector-level indicators aligned against them so that achievements and 
gaps can be clearly monitored, unnecessary duplications identified, and strategic direction of the Plan 
supervised. The framework will allow clear inter-sector analysis of the available information. Sectors will 
be responsible for tracking progress against their indicators which will be consolidated by the ISCG 
Secretariat with the Information Management Working Group (IMWG), and analysed in collaboration with 
the Sector Coordinators and Heads of Sub-Offices (HoSOG). The framework is included in the Annexes. 
2. The JRP will be reviewed at mid-term, with dashboards produced quarterly. In June, a full mid-term 
review of the JRP 2019 will be undertaken to make the revisions and adjustments necessary based on 
the evolution of the situation on the ground. At the end of March and the end of September, a dashboard 
reporting on progress against the Plan, including Strategic Objectives and Key Sector Indicators will be 
produced. 
3. The Information Management and Assessment Working Group (IMAWG) will coordinate periodic 
multi-sector assessments in refugee and host communities to identify needs and gaps. The first multisector 
needs assessment covering all Unions in Teknaf and Ukhiya, in order to underpin better targeting 
and coordination of host community response, was completed in 2018. Multi-Sector Needs Assessments 
will be coordinated by the ISCG Secretariat as Chair of the NAWG, with support from REACH, IOM and 
UNHCR. The ISCG Secretariat will ensure the harmonization of the different assessment methodologies, 
enhancing their efficiency. Results from more in-depth technical sector assessments (such as nutrition 
surveys or food security assessments), as well as the enhanced context analysis undertaken by UNDP 
and other development actors, will also be consolidated by the ISCG Secretariat. The aim is to provide 
a comprehensive analysis of the needs, gaps and the impact and outcomes of the response in order to 
inform strategic and operational decision-making. 
PART I: OVERVIEW AND RESPONSE STRATEGY 
GOVERNMENT OF 
BANGLADESH 
HUMANITARIAN 
STAKEHOLDERS 
Refugee Relief and 
Repatriation Commissioner (during natural disaster 
emergencies) 
The Dhaka & Cox’s Bazar Humanitarian architecture works to support the Government of Bangladesh’s 
response to the Rohingya Crisis. This Support extends at all the above noted levels in both 
Dhaka and Cox’s Bazar. 
Dedicated GoB lead for 
Rohingya Crisis 
Emergency Control 
Room at DC office 
MoFA Chair 
GoB Ministries 
(UN agencies when invited) 
NATIONAL TASK 
FORCE (NTF) 
MoDMR Emergency Coordination 
Ministry of Disaster 
Management & Relief 
(MoDMR) 
RRRC 
CiC 
UNOs 
DC 
RRRC 
ISCG 
AFD 
UNO 
CiC 
INTER SECTOR WORKING GROUPS 
IM and Assessment 
Working Group 
CwC Working 
Group 
Gender Working 
Group 
Emergency 
Communications Group PSEA Network 
Cash and Markets 
Working Group 
Cox’s Bazar 
Dhaka 
Co-Chairs 
Cox’s Bazar 
Dhaka 
STRATEGIC EXECUTIVE GROUP 
(SEG) 
HEADS OF SUB-OFFICES (HoSO) 
Health 
CS/WHO 
SECTOR COORDINATORS (SC) 
Shelter/NFI 
RRRC/IOM/Caritas 
Education 
Directorate of Primary 
Education/UNICEF/SCI 
Nutrition 
CS/UNICEF 
Logistics 
RRRC/WFP 
Site Management 
RRRC/IOM/DRC 
Emergency Telecoms. 
WFP 
Protection 
RRRC/UNHCR 
WASH 
DPHE/ACF/UNICEF 
Food Security 
District Food Controller, 
Dept.of Agricultural 
Extension/WFP/Mukti 
Child Protection 
MoWCA/UNICEF 
GBV 
MoWCA/District OCC 
Project/UNFPA 
Sub-sectors 
UN 
Resident Coordinator 
IOM 
Chief of Mission 
UNHCR 
Representative 
Senior Coordinator 
ISCG INTER SECTOR 
COORDINATION 
GROUP 
Secretariat 
Field Coordination 
Information Management 
& Analysis 
PSEA 
Emergency 
Coordination 
Host Communities 
engagement 
Rohingya Refugee Response Coordination Mechanism

23 
4. Funding against the JRP will be tracked on the Financial Tracking Service as well as at the sector 
level. In collaboration with the RRRC and other actors, funding through other channels will be tracked 
as well to underpin improved prioritization and allocation of resources. Bilateral donations and nontraditional 
donors, among other actors contributing outside the scope of the JRP 2019, are also expected 
to continue to play an important role in the overall response. The ISCG Secretariat will support, the 
RRRC in enhancing the tracking of funding resources across the response to enhance the efficiency of 
resource allocation, as well as tracking delivery and overall progress against the Strategic Objectives of 
the response. 
The New Way of Working and the Humanitarian/Development Nexus 
1. The humanitarian community is trying to strengthen linkages to development actors to ensure that 
ongoing humanitarian interventions link to the longer-term development priorities of the Government 
of Bangladesh. On the strategic level, this includes coordination at the Dhaka level with representatives 
of International Financial Institutions and donors. 
2. Given the urgent need to provide basic services, the World Bank (WB) and the Asian Development 
Bank (ADB) have proposed grant financing at the request of the Government of Bangladesh covering 
three years. In 2018, the World Bank President announced a grant of USD 480 million (including USD 
80 million loan taken in charge by Canada) under its IDA18 Regional Sub-Window for Refugees and Host 
Communities. It is aimed to benefit both refugee and host populations in the main sectors of health, 
education and multi-sector interventions including livelihoods and infrastructure (such as cyclone shelters 
and roads). The first phase of the grant would amount to USD 240 million and includes a health services 
provision project, an education and skills training project and a multi-sector support project. 
3. The Asian Development Bank proposed USD 200 million grant financing. The first phase of USD 100 
million approved in July 2018, supports investments for basic infrastructure to address the immediate 
needs of displaced persons. These include water and sanitation, disaster risk management, energy 
supply, and road access to and within camps. The second phase of support would be subject to the 
progress of the first phase. Both the WB and ADB funds will contribute to stabilizing the situation as 
the Government and humanitarian actors are able to link the emergency response to the expertise of 
development actors. 
4. The humanitarian community will continue to support the Government of Bangladesh and liaise with 
development actors linked to development planning in Cox’s Bazar District, including the WB and ADB, 
to share clear priorities with a view to maximizing opportunities presented through different coordination 
bodies. It will be crucial to ensure alignment of interventions on the way forward as well as linkages 
between Dhaka and Cox's Bazar on the strategic, advocacy and programmatic levels. 
5. In 2019, the World Bank and ADB funds in addition to other ongoing programmes in Bangladesh, 
will provide critical support in the camps and surrounding host communities across several sectors. 
The JRP 2019 requirements do not include contributions of the WB and ADB; however, they have been 
coordinated in partnership with the relevant sectors, and have been taken into account in the sectors' 
budgeting processes. Furthermore, resources from development funding streams will be an important 
contribution but are not intended to cover all the humanitarian needs of the target population in 2019. 
6. Other development donors are also making critical contributions and seeking synergies with their 
humanitarian funds for the whole of Cox's Bazar district. In 2019, these linkages must be better mapped 
and maximized to ensure that strategic investments build upon the work already undertaken, and to move 
towards the sustainability of the response. The European Union is leading the mapping of ongoing efforts. 
The ISCG Secretariat will include an expert in 2019 to foster new partnerships and collaboration, working 
with the Strategic Executive Group on how to better link Bangladesh’s development actors and networks 
that are primarily based in Dhaka, with the ongoing efforts by humanitarian partners at District level. 
PART I: OVERVIEW AND RESPONSE STRATEGY

24 
CROSS-CUTTING ISSUES 
Key cross-cutting priorities will be advanced within and between sectors in 2019. Protection and gender 
mainstreaming, environment and eco-system rehabilitation, social cohesion, and natural disaster preparedness 
will be the focus of joint efforts. Inter-sector linkages formed during the course of 2018 to drive 
cross-cutting issues forward cohesively and effectively, notably the multi-sector Energy and Environment 
Technical Working Group (bringing together in particular the Site Management, Shelter and NFI, and Food 
Security Sectors) and the Gender in Humanitarian Action Working Group, will be further strengthened. Natural 
disaster preparedness and social cohesion efforts will build on the groundwork laid in 2018. 
Further detail by sector, and across sectors, can be found in Annex 1. 
Protection and Gender Mainstreaming 
Protection and gender mainstreaming gaps, including enhanced Accountability to Affected Populations 
(AAP), will be addressed across the response in 2019. This will include pursuing a standardized complaints 
and feedback mechanisms, gender sensitive distributions, queues and facilities, and collection and analysis of 
sex and age disaggregated data to inform better programming. Access to services for women, men, boys and 
girls, and for vulnerable groups including the elderly and persons with disabilities, will be strengthened. Empowerment 
and representation of women and girls will be sought, with respect to the culture and religion of 
the Rohingya and host communities, and with their protection central to all engagements. The Protection, GBV 
Sub-Sector, and Gender in Humanitarian Action working groups will provide technical support and guidance. 
Environment and eco-system rehabilitation 
The Energy and Environment Technical Working Group (EETWG), hosted under the Site Management and 
Site Development, Shelter, and Food Security Sectors, will continue to provide technical guidance on environment 
and eco-system rehabilitation. Joint programmes that emerged from this inter-sector coordination initiative 
in 2018 will continue and scale, including the provision of LPG as alternative fuel, combined with disaster 
risk mitigation such as slope stabilization, and reforestation to mitigate deforestation. Waste management (including 
sludge, solid and medical waste) will be enhanced. Water quality and the health of the aquifers will be 
closely monitored. In 2019, the response will establish common bamboo treatment plants, as well as common 
bamboo quality standards and control procedures to reject immature culms and avoid overharvesting. The 
poor quality of bamboo, resulting from inadequate procurement practices, has emerged as a critical concern 
for the environment and for the resilience of structures in the camps. 
Natural Disaster Preparedness 
Cox’s Bazar has two cyclone seasons per year, with high likelihood of a cyclone, flood or other severe 
weather events. Preparedness and contingency must be in place for the 2019 seasons. Since 1960, the 
Bangladesh Meteorological Department has registered 33 cyclones in Bangladesh, of which 11 have directly 
impacted Cox’s Bazar District: Bangladesh as a whole has registered on average one cyclone every 1.7 
years, and Cox’s Bazar in particular one cyclone every 5.7 years. Most recently, Cox’s Bazar has been hit 
by a cyclone in 2004, 2015 and 2017. While the 2018 seasons were fortunately mild, with no cyclone or major 
flood, this may not be the case in 2019. 
The 2019 Joint Response Plan includes preparedness to enable rapid frontline response, including 
distribution of a minimum support package, to a severe weather event within 72 hours for the targeted 
population in need. The Preparedness and Contingency Plan is based on a scenario in which a Category 1 
cyclone makes landfall in Cox’s Bazar, destroying the majority of the camps, with the majority of the targeted 
population affected and temporarily displaced. This includes adequate strategic prepositioning of key supplies, 
review and fine-tuning of response mechanisms at the District, Upazila and Camp levels including training 
of volunteer groups, and establishment of adequate mobile response capacity. The absence of adequate 
evacuation spaces and the additional challenges relating to the mechanics of evacuation of a significantly 
women and child population remain a critical concern. The mapping of existing cyclone shelters identified 
by the Government indicate that in Ukhiya, Seventy-five structures are to be used as cyclone shelters with 
capacity of 67,550 individuals, while in Teknaf 67 cyclone shelters have a capacity of 65,200 individuals. In 
2019, several cyclone resistant Learning Spaces will be constructed within the camp boundaries, ongoing 
improvements of 59 educational structures to serve as cyclone shelters and the rehabilitation of 60 existing 
PART I: OVERVIEW AND RESPONSE STRATEGY

25 
shelters. The rehabilitation and constructions of cyclone shelters in Ukhiya and Teknaf by development 
partners, serving the host community, are not included in the JRP 2019 budget: the World Bank and ADB 
will cover a proportion of the need with 73 climate-resilient multi-purpose structures, but further funding 
will be required to rehabilitate all the shelters. Support will continue to be provided to the existing Disaster 
Management Committees at District, Upazila and Union levels. 
Depending on the severity of any actual weather event and on the results of joint rapid needs assessments, 
additional resources would need to be mobilized in collaboration with the Humanitarian Coordination 
Task Team (HCTT) co-chaired by the UN and the Ministry of Disaster Management and Relief, to cover 
needs thereafter, with appropriate resource mobilization strategies to be activated, if required. This may 
include dedicated appeals, emergency supply chains and surge capacity for the emergency response, 
PART I: OVERVIEW AND RESPONSE STRATEGY 
7 most aected Unions 
1000 meters 
Camp boundaries 
Host Community buildings 
500 meters 
100 meters Teknaf 
Whykong 
Palong Khali 
Nhilla 
Raja Palong 
Ratna Palong 
Ghandung 
Haldia Palong 
Jalia Palong 
Baharchhara 
Sabrang 
Teknaf 
Paurashava 
Rohingya Host Community 
Settlement Map by Union 
as well as subsequent recovery programming. The detailed 
Cyclone Preparedness and Contingency Plan is maintained and 
updated seperately. 
Social Cohesion 
In 2019, under the leadership of the Government of 
Bangladesh, the response will seek to better harness the 
opportunities and potential of the operation for all affected 
populations and to foster social cohesion. The concept 
of social cohesion does not by itself represent a durable 
solution (local integration), but recognizes the importance of 
peaceful coexistence of communities within the camps as 
well as between host communities and refugees / Forcibly 
Displaced Myanmar Nationals. Therefore, programmes and 
projects will be designed in ways that mitigate tensions and 
promote positive relations (living side by side) between and 
within those communities, in line with the relevant policies of 
the Government and humanitarian actors. Sectors are sharing 
knowledge, employing locally in their operations, 
and supporting local traders and producers. Conflict 
sensitivity will inform programming and coordination 
efforts to promote mutual respect and peaceful coexistence. 
To underpin better targeting of assistance 
based on need for people and communities in 
Ukhiya and Teknaf Upazilas affected by the crisis, 
comprehensive multi-sector assessments are 
currently underway across all camps and Unions of 
Ukhiya and Teknaf, in coordination with all sectors. 
In addition to enhanced targeting and design of 
interventions across sectors, quick impact projects 
in host communities will be identified and delivered 
under the guidance of the Deputy Commissioner 
and Upazila Nirbahi Officers. 

PEOPLE TARGETED BY SECTOR (AGE AND GENDER DISAGGREGATED) 
899,349 7,163 335,930 
899,349 7,163 335,930 
339,862 2,707 120,331 
899,349 7,163 335,930 
899,349 7,163 335,930 
300,939 2,397 44,254 
762,251 6,071 284,174 
899,349 7,163 125,000 
899,349 7,163 335,930 
Refugees in 
Camps 
Refugees in 
Host Communities 
Bangladeshi 
Host Communities 
Protection 
Food Security 
Education 
Site 
Management 
Health 
Nutrition 
WASH 
Sheter/NFI 
CWC 
BY LOCATION BY SEX & AGE TOTAL 
% Female % Male % Children, adult 
and elderly People Targeted 
SECTOR 
52% 
52% 
51% 
52% 
52% 
65% 
52% 
52% 
52% 
55% 
55% 
99% 
55% 
55% 
87% 
55% 
55% 
55% 
41% 
41% 
1% 
41% 
41% 
13% 
41% 
41% 
41% 
4% 
4% 
4% 
4% 
4% 
4% 
4% 
1,242,442 
1,242,442 
462,367 
1,242,442 
1,242,442 
347,590 
1,052,495 
1,031,512 
1,242,442 

PART II: SECTOR 
STRATEGIES 
zzProtection 
..Gender-Based Violence (GBV) 
..Child Protection (CP) 
zzFood Security 
zzEducation 
zzSite Management and Site Development (SMSD) 
zzHealth 
zzNutrition 
zzWater, Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH) 
zzShelter and Non-Food Items (NFI) 
zzCommunication with Communities (CwC) 
zzLogistics 
zzEmergency Telecommunications 
zzCoordination 
Photo Credit: ISCG / Nayana Bose / 2018

28 
PROTECTION 
SECTOR OBJECTIVES 
1. Monitor and advocate for access to territory, prevention of refoulement and respect for 
refugees’ rights, whilst enhancing continuous registration and documentation for all refugee 
women, men, girls and boys. Related to SO 1 
2. Promote a community-based approach to the response and provide services to persons at 
heightened protection risk, including girls, boys, women and men of all ages and with diverse 
needs and vulnerabilities. Related to SO 1 & 2 
3. Support system strengthening, by supporting Government and local partners, promoting 
peaceful coexistence and enhancing social cohesion within and between refugee and host 
communities. Related to SO 1 & 3 
4. Improve access to quality survivor-centred services by responding to individual needs, 
preventing and mitigating GBV risks, and empowering women, girls and survivors of GBV. 
Related to SO 1 & 2 
5. Provide specialized child protection services to children most at risk, including adolescents 
most at risk. Related to SO 1 & 2 
6. Promote an integrated and multi-sectoral approach to protection. Related to SO 1, 2 & 3 
FUNDING REQUIRED 
USD38.9M 
POPULATION TARGETED10 
1.24M 
906,51211 
Rohingya Refugees 
335,930 
Bangladeshi Host Community 
11 
Sector Projects 
28 
Sector Partners 
CONTACT 
Anna Pelosi 
pelosi@unhcr.org 
Government of Bangladesh 
RRRC, MoWCA, District OCC 
FUNDING REQUIRED 
USD23.5M 
POPULATION TARGETED 
284,119 
284,119 
Rohingya Refugees 
-
Bangladeshi Host Community 
13 
Sector Projects 
30 
Sector Partners 
CONTACT 
Ranjini Paskarasingam 
rpaskarasingam@unicef.org 
FUNDING REQUIRED 
USD23.5M 
POPULATION TARGETED 
610,117 
610,117 
Rohingya Refugees 
-
Bangladeshi Host Community 
13 
Sector Projects 
24 
Sector Partners 
CONTACT 
Nejema Ibrahim 
neibrahim@unfpa.org 
PROTECTION CHILD PROTECTION GENDER BASED VIOLENCE 
1% 
Disaster Preparedness 
Regular 

29 
NEEDS ANALYSIS 
The Rohingya refugee crisis is a protection crisis at its 
core. Rohingya, who are stateless, have survived decades 
of deprivation and lack of recognition of their most basic 
human rights in Myanmar. Since August 2017, more than 
745,000 refugees sought asylum in Bangladesh (out of 
which some 16,00012 arrived in 2018), joining close to 170,000 
others who had sought refuge before the 2017 influx. 
The refugees arrived to Bangladesh seeking refuge from 
continued persecution and violence; and the psychosocial 
distress many refugees suffered from was compounded 
by additional protection risks and uncertainties to which 
they are exposed in displacement. One-third of refugee 
families have at least one specific protection vulnerability 
that requires specialized protection attention. 
While Rohingya refugees are resilient and rely on 
strong community-based protection and self-support 
mechanisms, there is a need to strengthen the presence 
of law enforcement agencies, and ensure refugees’ 
access to justice and increase the measures taken to 
address risks of exploitation, trafficking in persons, and, 
drug trafficking. Protection monitoring findings through 
focus groups discussions uniformly indicate that women 
and girls, as well as men and boys, have identified needs 
for proper lighting (both street and portable lighting), more 
protection and gender sensitive infrastructures, and, more 
community centres and recreational facilities13. 
Family structures have been significantly disrupted since 
the onset of the crisis, heightening the vulnerability of 
older persons, widows in particular, and persons with 
disabilities who are confronted with situations of isolation. 
Persons with specific protection needs due to their gender 
identity and sexual orientation have also been found at 
risk of discrimination, harassment including sexual abuse, 
exploitation and trafficking. Meanwhile, the youth have 
specific needs and face more protection risks than other 
age-groups as they often do not benefit from targeted 
programmes and have inadequate access to education 
or employment opportunities leading to idleness in the 
camps. 
Child Protection 
Children represent 55% of all refugees and the majority 
are in need of immediate child protection assistance. 
Children face serious protection risks including 
psychosocial distress, neglect, abuse, separation from 
caregivers, sexual violence, child marriage, child labour, 
and trafficking. Children are experiencing high levels of 
distress after witnessing extreme violence in Myanmar, as 
well as being exposed to continued stressful and uncertain 
living conditions upon arrival in Bangladesh. As of October 
2018, some 6,100 unaccompanied and separated children 
have been registered and are at heightened risk of child 
trafficking, abuse and exploitation in the camps. Girls, who 
represent a larger proportion (57%14) of this vulnerable 
group, are particularly at risk of child marriage, sexual 
exploitation, abuse and neglect. There remains a high need 
for robust family-based alternative care arrangements for 
unaccompanied and separated children, as well as family 
tracing and reunification and the provision of support to 
foster care families15. 
The need to provide mental health and psychosocial 
support for refugees of all ages and diversity groups is 
tremendous, as psychological distress continues to be a 
salient concern for all, including for children16. Child marriage 
is a negative coping mechanism with some girls marrying 
as young as 12. Boys are at heightened risk of child labour, 
exploitation and trafficking. Agencies continue to monitor 
the worst forms of child labour, involving children as young 
as 7 years old being recruited into abusive and exploitative 
work. Adolescents face specific risks, exacerbated by the 
absence of education, lack of life skills education and safe 
livelihood opportunities, and, by their limited participation 
in decision making. Overall, understanding and response 
timing for child rights violations needs improvement via a 
strengthened alert and monitoring system. 
Gender-Based Violence 
Out of the total refugee population, 52% are women and 
girls17. Many of them have been exposed to widespread 
and severe forms of sexual violence in Myanmar before 
and during flight and, following displacement, they 
continue to be at disproportionate risk of GBV, including 
domestic violence, forced/child marriage, and exploitation 
and trafficking. As of November 2018, only 43% of minimum 
service coverage has been achieved for urgently required 
GBV case management and psychosocial support for 
children and adults. Out of 34 camps, four are still not 
covered by essential minimum GBV services (case 
management, access to PSS, health, clinical management 
of rape (CMR), legal counselling and safe spaces for 
women and girls); five only have 25-50% of GBV service 
DISAGGREGATED DATA
Children (0-4 years) Children (5-11 years) Children (12-17 years) Adult (18-59 years) Elderly (>59 years) 
Rohingya Total Female Total Male Female Male Female Male Female Male Female Male Female Male 
Protection 471,386 435,125 81,586 81,586 99,716 108,781 63,456 63,456 208,498 163,172 18,130 18,130 
CP 147,742 136,377 25,571 25,571 31,253 34,094 19,888 19,888 65,347 51,141 5,682 5,682 
GBV 317,261 292,856 54,910 54,910 67,113 73,214 42,708 42,708 140,327 109,821 12,202 12,202 
Children (0-17 years) Adult (18-59 years) Elderly (>59 years) 
Bangladeshi Total Female Total Male Female Male Female Male Female Male 
Protection 174,684 161,246 96,076 88,685 73,367 67,723 5,241 4,837 
CP - - - - - - - - 
GBV - - - - - - - - 
PART II: SECTOR STRATEGIES

30 
coverage18 and another eight camps have 25% service 
coverage. Additionally, accessibility of these services 
remains limited due to movement restrictions as well as 
fear of women and girls to move outside of their shelter. At 
least 115 additional GBV case management service entry 
points19 are required to achieve essential coverage for lifesaving 
care for the total population in need, including host 
communities. 
Access to essential health services for survivors of GBV 
is also severely limited, with nearly 56% of sites lacking 
required services. Expansion of CMR, in combination with 
other sexual and reproductive health services, is critical 
to prevent unwanted pregnancy, sexually transmitted 
disease and social stigmatization of women and girls. 
Meanwhile, intimate partner violence remains the most 
common concern reported by survivors of GBV. Efforts 
to strengthen the protective environment and support 
mechanisms must be approached through meaningful 
engagement of men, women, boys, and girls in GBV risk 
mitigation at the community level. Among the Bangladeshi 
host communities, approximately 85% of areas have 
severely limited access to GBV service provision. 
Sustained advocacy efforts are required to recognize 
the legal status of refugees in Bangladesh and address 
important protection issues, especially with regard 
to civil documentation, access to justice, the right to 
education and access to livelihood, while at the same 
time pursuing sustainable solutions. Effective access to 
civil documentation for the most vital events, such as birth, 
marriage, divorce and death is a priority. 
In 2019, protection partners will scale up their protection 
monitoring programmes and analysis of risks, threats, 
vulnerabilities and incidents at camp level and overall, in 
order to identify trends and key issues for advocacy and 
protection interventions. Particular attention will be paid 
to enhancing continued registration and documentation 
for all refugee women, men, girls and boys. As such, 
the joint Government of Bangladesh-UNHCR verification 
exercise will continue in 2019 in order to consolidate 
and update the existing unified registration database of 
the entire refugee population. This crucial exercise will 
provide documentation for refugees, whilst strengthening 
assistance delivery by all humanitarian actors. Regular 
border and settlement monitoring visits and protection 
advocacy at all levels for the promotion of respect for 
refugees’ rights will continue in order to maintain protection 
space and create a conducive protection environment. 
Building on the 2018 strategic approach to protection 
programming consisting in putting refugees at the 
centre, reinforcing the community-based approach to the 
protection response will continue to be a key priority in 
2019. In parallel, strengthening coordination of interventions 
at the field level, closer to the refugee community and in 
support of protection and gender mainstreaming, will be 
prioritized. The network of camp focal points established 
with a bottom-up approach in 2018, will be reinforced 
and consolidated. In close consultation with the Camp-in- 
Charge Officials, their capacity to monitor and respond to 
needs, and, to provide advice and service delivery closer 
to refugees will be supported, through regular visits, 
guidance and capacity building opportunities. Advocacy 
at all levels will be strategically paired with local efforts to 
improve access to national systems, including access to 
justice thereby contributing to safer camps by reducing 
impunity and social tension. 
Given that the lack of access to education and portable 
skills development opportunities continues to expose 
refugees, especially women and adolescent girls, as well 
as youth in general, to protection risks and potentially 
harmful coping mechanisms, the response will strategically 
prioritize these age groups across all areas of protection 
interventions. Initiatives such as informal and portable 
skills development, education, tailored psychosocial 
support and recreational sport activities will be scaled up 
to address the situation of idleness and hopelessness in 
which many youth increasingly find themselves. Protection 
partners will work with Imams and other traditional leaders 
in the camp who are trusted by the community to improve 
the protection environment for all. For young women 
and girls in particular, capacity building, coaching on 
protection-sensitive leadership skills, self-determination 
and self-development will be carried out by specialized 
protection partners. 
Given remaining gaps across the response, protection 
mainstreaming and a multi-sectoral approach to protection 
will be a key strategic objective next year. Key sectors will 
be prioritized such as Health, Food Security, WASH, Shelter 
and Site Management, and technical protection guidance 
will be provided in order to inform sectoral project planning 
and implementation. 
In order to foster an inclusive and more participatory 
approach to assistance throughout the response, 
outreach programmes and existing community-based 
protection mechanisms will target all persons with 
specific needs, including persons with disabilities, older 
persons, chronically or severely ill persons, persons 
living with HIV/ AIDS, and female headed households, 
among others. Protection and health actors will work 
together in strengthening accessibility and acceptability 
of healthcare services, including for persons with specific 
needs and those with disabilities and reduced mobility, 
both in terms of mobile outreach and access to the local 
healthcare system. The mobilization of mobile protection 
teams (PERUs) will be an important pillar of the emergency 
protection preparedness and response to seasonal 
weather-related risks and natural disasters. Given their 
role as key protection stakeholders in the response, the 
host communities’ priority legal and public service needs 
will continue to be assessed and addressed, both through 
small-scale projects focusing on social cohesion and 
the strengthening of public systems and services aiming 
at increasing service access for both host and refugee 
communities. 
Child Protection 
The 2019 Joint Response Plan contains a dedicated 
objective, developed in coordination with the Department 
of Social Services (DSS), to strengthen the child protection 
system, including linkages to, and improved quality of, 
government-led service delivery. Based on collective 
analysis and planning, key operational frameworks 
pertaining to areas such as case management and 
alternative care will be harmonized, and joint learning 
RESPONSE STRATEGY 
PART II: SECTOR STRATEGIES

31 
initiatives undertaken and extended to other key line 
ministries, such as the Ministries of Social Welfare, 
Women and Children Affairs and Justice. As key partners 
in ensuring quality and coverage, local child protection 
NGOs and civil society organizations will be engaged in 
partnerships that reciprocally strengthen technical and 
institutional capacity, through coaching, mentoring, and 
joint implementation approaches. To boost local partner 
participation in coordination, a revolving position will be 
made available for local partners to be attached to the 
coordination position as a form of mentorship, for periods 
of 3 months. CPSS will continue to strengthen child 
safeguarding measures and ensure that all interventions 
are safe for children, including providing mandatory 
training on child safeguarding, PSEA and code of conduct 
for all humanitarian actors. 
To track and respond to the overall trajectory of child 
protection by key issue and geographical severity, a 
situation and alert system will be established to enable CP 
partners to receive alerts of any alarming changes in the 
situation for children from a range of actors. In addition, 
an integrated analysis, making use of predictable datasets 
as regards, for example, food security, education and 
health, will enable partners to make significant shifts in the 
programmatic response to boost efficiency, effectiveness 
and coverage. 
Across refugee and host communities, girls and boys 
with heightened protection risks will be identified and 
provided with specialized case management services. 
This will include referrals to service providers including 
but not limited to medical, Mental Health and Psycho- 
Social Support (MHPSS), legal and cash-based assistance 
(provided by DSS) for refugee families with such 
children. For unaccompanied children, identification and 
documentation, family tracing services, including cross 
border where possible, case management and provision 
of appropriate alternative family or community-based 
care will be scaled up and strengthened. Child survivors 
of sexual and GBV will be supported in coordination with 
the GBV Sub-Sector. The capacity of social workers will 
continue to be built through learning strategies including 
case management training, mentoring and coaching. 
The protective environment for children, including 
adolescents, will continue to be enhanced through 
Community-Based Child Protection Committees which 
monitor child protection risks and develop communityled 
response plans, including working to address social 
norms affecting levels of violence, abuse and exploitation, 
preventing trafficking and referring children in need to key 
services. Community-based mechanisms will be linked to 
service providers via predictable feedback mechanisms as 
a means to ensure accountability to affected populations. 
Investment will be made in strengthening the social 
workforce in both the refugee camps and host community 
in order to increase the quality of prevention, mitigation 
and response services for children, particularly those with 
heightened protection risks. Communities, and specifically 
adolescents, will be engaged as partners and cocreators 
in assessment, analysis, programme design and 
monitoring of services and will be supported to participate 
in peer to peer activities including those that promote 
peaceful coexistence. A key shared initiative will be the 
development of adolescent and youth hubs, through 
which CP agencies will partner with other sectors such as 
Education to co-create and scale up solutions related to 
education and learning opportunities, skills for learning, 
employability, decent work (including entrepreneurial 
skills), and empowerment, with a focus on girls. Where 
possible, seed funding will be attached to each hub to 
facilitate adolescent-led initiatives. 
Gender-Based Violence 
Improved access to information and services for GBV 
response shall be achieved through expanding integrated 
service approaches for GBV case management and 
psychosocial support and the expansion of SSWG activities 
to include empowerment for women and girls. This shall 
be complemented by robust community mobilization 
strategies that aim to strengthen the skills and capacities 
of refugees to mitigate GBV risks. Case management 
service providers with GBV and CP specializations shall 
further strengthen care by expanding service options for 
child survivors of sexual violence. To ensure the provision 
of quality PSS and health services including CMR for 
survivors of GBV in a timely manner, the GBV Sub-Sector 
will: 
• Increase the number of trained social workers and 
case managers to provide survivor-centric case 
management; 
• Expand the capacity of CMR, together with other 
sexual and reproductive health services including 
training of medical staff and equipping health facilities 
with post rape kits and related medical supplies to 
deliver quality clinical management of rape; 
• Sensitize the legal and security actors (police, judges 
and general prosecutors) to improve and facilitate 
survivors’ access to justice and security services, 
addressing impunity of perpetrators, ensuring 
survivors of GBV have access to security, safety, 
material assistance and legal services treating them 
with respect and dignity, so that they are not exposed 
to further stigmatization and have immediate and 
effective access to justice; 
• Reinforce community centred approach to ensure the 
participation of key partners (including women, girls, 
boys and men) through GBV prevention and response 
activities. 
PART II: SECTOR STRATEGIES 
10. Protection: While specific objectives will have specific targets, the entire refugee population is in need of protection and will constitute the overall target. 
Gender-Based Violence: A formula reflective of the capacity to reach the community with GBV services in 2018 was used, so as to represent the target population that 
the Sub-Sector will realistically be able to reach. 
Child Protection: The Needs Identification and Analysis Framework (NIAF) by the global CP AoR was carried out and combined with other existing information source for 
its data analysis and interpretation. Information sources of the NIAF exercise included (i) UNHCR/RRRC Refugee disaggregated data (Family Counting), (ii) IOM DTM site 
assessment (iii) FS Household Survey; (iv) Health Household assessment; (v) Education needs analysis.

32 
PART II: SECTOR STRATEGIES 
Through the NIAF process of data usefulness and complementarity, the Child Protection Sub-Sector developed a ‘severity scale’ to identify children in need and priority 
camps, as follows: 
a. Refugee Children In Need (CiN): 284,119 refugee children between 0 to 18 years are in need of acute and immediate CP assistance. This figure represents 31 % of the 
total population and 58% of children affected by the refugee crisis. The most affected and at-risk groups are: 1) 132,957 Children registered in households with special 
needs directly linked to CP responses; and 2) 45,870 children registered in households where at least one family member has special needs. 
b. Most affected areas: 1) Camps with confirmed presence of child marriage: i.e. 01E/07 and 22. 2) Camps with confirmed presence of children contributing to HH livelihoods 
and who are engaged in child labour: i.e. 3/4/4Ext/5/8E/9/13, 01E/07 and 22. CiN living in these areas number 105,292 
c. Host Community children in need: 107,162 host community children between 0 to 18 years are in need of acute and immediate CP assistance. This figure represents 
58% of the total child population in the host communities. 
11. Some refugees living in host communities and in other locations beyond camp boundaries may not have been counted. 
12. ISCG, 10 Jan. 2018, Situation Report Rohingya Crisis, Cox’s Bazar. Available at: https://www.humanitarianresponse.info/en/operations/bangladesh/document/situation-
report-rohingya-crisis-coxs-bazar-10-january-2019 
13. UNHCR Camp settlement and Protection Profiles, April 2018, available at: https://data2.unhcr.org/en/documents/details/63821 
14. Child Protection Sub-Sector 4W. 
15. A recent study revealed that an overwhelming number of orphans or separated children have strong reasons to believe that their parent or caregiver died during the 
attack. Child Protection Sub-Sector, Cox’s Bazar, Bangladesh, November 2018, ‘Understanding family separation among Rohingya Refugees’. 
16. A recent assessment reveals that only 13% of Rohingya refugees had access to mental health and psychosocial services; which demonstrates that psychosocial and 
mental health support needs largely outgrow the current coverage of services 
17. According to UNHCR-RRRC Family Counting data. 
18. GBV Service coverage map, GBV Sub-Sector, August 2018. 
19. This figure is based on the ideal that one centre can cover approximately 6,000 individuals 
Photo Credit: BRAC / Kamrul Hasan / 2017

33 
FOOD SECURITY 
SECTOR OBJECTIVES 
1. Ensure and sustain timely provision of life-saving food assistance for Rohingya refugees. 
Related to SO 1 & 2 
2. Promote portable skills development opportunities for Rohingya and enhance the livelihoods 
and resilience of host communities. Related to SO 1 & 2 
3. Address and mitigate environmental impact caused by Rohingya refugees’ influx and support 
social cohesion through enhancement and restoration of natural resources. Related to SO 1 
& 3 
NEEDS ANALYSIS 
Trends of food security indicators, suggest that overall food security amongst 
the Rohingya refugee population has improved, which is likely due to the regular 
and effective general food assistance programme through in-kind and voucher 
programmes. Under existing conditions, the refugee population remains 100% 
reliant on food assistance to sustain the minimum daily required kilocalories per 
individual and for diet diversification. This dependency is due to several factors 
such as: lack of opportunity for own food production, limited financial and physical 
access to food, movement restrictions, protection issues and limited access to 
cooking fuel and sources of energy. Thus, sustaining the food assistance of the 
population is paramount as breakage in the food supply pipeline could deepen 
the existing emergency and threatens the survival of the vulnerable Rohingya 
population. To address dietary diversity, response actors are moving forward 
with complementary activities to the general blanket food assistance through 
supplementary/fresh food vouchers and hot meals provision. However, the roll-out 
has been somewhat challenged by competing priorities of the immediate food 
needs and funding commitments. 
There is an increased caseload in need of rapid food assistance, largely due to 
relocations and displacement related to weather hazards, inter-community tensions 
and new arrivals. Also, the tendency of the community to fragment families into 
smaller family units is also contributing to an increased household caseload. 
The food and nutrition security of the poorest amongst the host community 
is a growing concern. Many have lost access to previously farmed lands (often 
government forest land) and have simultaneously lost work opportunities to cheaper 
refugee labour market. Forest products on which they previously depended are 
no longer available. It has also become increasingly clear that the response actors 
will need to increase their focus on host community food security, particularly in 
hard-hit communities. In addition, natural disasters and deforestation may prolong 
and worsen food insecurity situation for both host communities and Rohingya and 
exacerbate the likelihood of natural disaster and its impact on both communities. 
FUNDING REQUIRED 
USD255M 
1% 
Disaster Preparedness 
Regular 
POPULATION TARGETED20 
1.24M 
906,512 
Rohingya Refugees 
335,930 
Bangladeshi Host Community 
22 
Sector Projects 
39 
Sector Partners 
CONTACT 
Stella Atiti 
stella.atiti@wfp.org 
Government of Bangladesh 
RRRC, District Food Controller, Department 
of Agricultural Extension 
DISAGGREGATED DATA
Children (0-4 years) Children (5-11 years) Children (12-17 years) Adult (18-59 years) Elderly (>59 years) 
Total Female Total Male Female Male Female Male Female Male Female Male Female Male 
Rohingya 471,386 435,125 81,586 81,586 99,716 108,781 63,456 63,456 208,498 163,172 18,130 18,130 
Children (0-17 years) Adult (18-59 years) Elderly (>59 years) 
Total Female Total Male Female Male Female Male Female Male 
Bangladeshi 174,684 161,246 96,076 88,685 73,367 67,723 5,241 4,837 
PART II: SECTOR STRATEGIES

34 
Ensure and sustain timely provision of life-saving food 
assistance for Rohingya refugees: The Sector will 
continue blanket unconditional food assistance for all the 
current 906,512 refugees and new arrivals and continue 
transitioning of in-kind food distribution (GFD) to e-voucher 
system, market-based programming for basic food needs, 
allowing beneficiaries to choose from 19 food commodities21 
that are available in the registered e-voucher shops in 
the camps, thereby improving their dietary diversity and 
choice of food items. This will, in addition, contribute to 
the strengthening of the local economy. The transition is 
systematic, 46,000 households have been enrolled and 
it is anticipated that by July 2019, all targeted households 
will have been shifted from in-kind food distribution to 
e-voucher. 
The food items for GFD in-kind (rice, pulses and cooking oil) 
and value of e-voucher are based on the Sphere standard 
of 2,100kcal intake per person per day. Thus, blanket food 
assistance will be complemented with voucher for fresh 
food items22 and target the most vulnerable23 categories 
and those with limited access to food, with an aim on 
enhancing diet diversity. As per ongoing strategy all new 
arrivals and displaced persons will continue to receive 
fortified biscuits and emergency food, before being 
enrolled on blanket food assistance. Additional stock will 
be pre-positioned as contingency for the monsoon season. 
Fortified biscuits will continue being provided to children 
attending education centres in the refugee camps. This will 
address short term hunger and support regular attendance. 
Cooked food (Khichuri)24 will continue to be provided as 
an emergency response for new influx, displaced persons 
in case of natural disaster and on an ongoing basis to 
persons with special needs (elderly, disabled, people at 
risk of malnutrition such as; young children, pregnant and 
lactating mothers. The Food Security Sector will continue 
to coordinate closely with Nutrition Sector for monitoring 
and responding to special nutrition cases. Also, the Sector 
will continue running community kitchens to compliment 
the hot meals intervention. 
Promote portable skills development for Rohingya 
refugees and enhance the livelihoods and resilience 
of host communities: The Sector will support portable 
skills development programmes within the camp through 
activities that promote socio-economic empowerment 
such as vocational trainings, multipurpose women and 
youth centres, and micro-gardens (for own consumption 
and income). The Food Security Sector will target youth 
who are not able to access learning activities. The Sector 
will coordinate closely with the Education Sector to identify 
areas of coordination/collaboration to ensure enhanced 
impact. The Sector will also provide incentives to refugees 
(for economic access to food) to participate in activities 
such as tree planting, slope stabilization (through terracing 
and planting tuff), and improvement of roads and bridges. 
This activity is being coordinated with other actors, through 
the Energy and Environment Technical Working Group to 
ensure complementarity. For the host communities, the 
Sector will implement programmes aiming to increase 
access to sustainable livelihoods and resilience by 
supporting income generating activities, skills development 
and enhancing food production (crop production, fisheries, 
small ruminants, poultry) complemented with value 
addition, market linkages. Market capacity enhancement 
will be a focus of implementation modality. Where 
feasible, cash for work or food for work will be used as a 
modality for community disaster resilience, infrastructure 
development/restoration, forest restoration and natural 
resource management. 
Address and mitigate environmental impact caused 
by Rohingya refugees’ influx and support peaceful 
coexistence through enhancement and restoration of 
natural resources: The Sector will support land restoration, 
reforestation, rehabilitation and enhancement of 
watersheds to address the severe environmental impacts 
in the area around the camps, reduce associated disaster 
risks (such as landslides and flash floods) and enhance 
resilience of both host communities and refugees. Such 
impacts are of common interests to both communities, 
which will be jointly addressed through such activities 
and will contribute to peaceful coexistence. In this context 
incentives, associated inputs and community sensitization 
and mobilization, will be adopted wherever feasible. The 
Disaster Risk Reduction planning and implementation will 
complement and support the Government of Bangladesh 
and MoDMR-led strategies and activities. 
RESPONSE STRATEGY 
PART II: SECTOR STRATEGIES 
20. Under existing conditions, the refugee population remains 100% reliant on food distribution to sustain the daily minimum required kilocalories per individual. Thus; 
the Sector will target the whole refugee population with emergency food assistance. The projected population of Teknaf and Ukhiya is 548,474 individuals. While not all 
of them need support, considering the high level of poverty and the impact of the Rohingya influx, it is assumed that at least 60% need livelihood support; which means 
335,930 host community members to be supported next year 
21. Rice-atap, red lentils, iodized salt, fortified soybean oil (Rupchada-polypack), fortified soybean oil (Fresh/Teer-polypack), sugar, fresh spinach – kalmi, fresh spinach - lal 
shak, potatoes, onion, garlic, chili (green, red, powder), turmeric powder, egg, lemon, YSP, pumpkin. 
22. Vegetables, eggs, fish, spices. 
23. Households with children under 5, people with disabilities/chronically ill/elderly/pregnant and lactating mothers 
24. Mixture of rice, pulse, oils, spices, vegetable, egg or meat (beef or chicken).

35 
EDUCATION 
SECTOR OBJECTIVES 
1. Expand and strengthen immediate access to equitable learning opportunities, in a safe and 
protective environment, for crisis-affected refugee and host community children and youth 
(3-24 years). Related to SO 1 & 2 
2. Improve the quality of teaching and learning for refugee children and youth, aligned with 
Education Sector standards, and increase teaching-related professional development 
opportunities, and supporting relevant improvements to education for host community 
children. Related to SO 1 & 2 
3. Increase refugee and host community participation and engagement in the education of 
children and youth. Related to SO 3 
NEEDS ANALYSIS 
Despite progress in providing immediate access to learning opportunities for 
Rohingya refugees, over 39% of children 3-14 years and 97% of adolescents 
and youth aged 15-24 years are not attending any type of education facility. 
Around 2,000 additional facilities are needed to improve access to learning 
activities for children 3-14 years26. Limited space in the camps and the need to 
provide for more urgent life-saving provisions, contributed to the insufficient 
allocation of spaces for learning facilities. An additional 68 acres of land 
would be required to build the learning facilities required. Learning facilities 
have suffered from a lack of standardized and relevant teaching and learning 
materials and recruitment of sufficiently educated Rohingya learning facilitators 
remains a challenge. 
Socio-cultural beliefs and practices, along with protection concerns have 
impacted participation. 40% of parents of adolescent girls and 33% of parents 
of adolescent boys reported that education is not appropriate for their 
children, indicating a gap in sensitization on education and rights of children. 
This is partly linked to social norms which restrict mobility for girls after puberty. 
Perceived safety threats in learning facilities is also concern, particularly for 
young learners aged 6-14 years (32% for girls and 25% for boys) more so than 
for ages 15-18 years (32% for girls and 18% for boys). 
The recent refugee influx has increased fragility in the district of Cox’s Bazar. 
Even before the refugee influx, Cox’s Bazar was one of the lowest education 
performing districts in Bangladesh with a net intake rate for the first grade of 
primary school at 72.6% for boys and 69.1% for girls, compared to the national 
average of 98%. Overall, host community school infrastructure is underprepared 
for environmental risks and urgently in need of upgrading. Bangladeshi parateachers 
have left host community schools for higher paid work in the camps 
learning facilities, increasing student-teacher ratios in the schools, and leading 
to tensions over the impacts of the Rohingya influx27. 
FUNDING REQUIRED 
USD59.5M 
2% 
Disaster Preparedness 
Regular 
POPULATION TARGETED23 
462,400 
342,569 
Rohingya Refugees 
120,331 
Bangladeshi Host Community 
13 
Sector Projects 
24 
Sector Partners 
CONTACT 
Frederic Vincent 
edusector.cxb@humanitarianresponse. 
info 
Government of Bangladesh 
Directorate of Primary Education 
DISAGGREGATED DATA
Children (0-4 years) Children (5-11 years) Children (12-17 years) Adult (18-59 years) Elderly (>59 years) 
Total Female Total Male Female Male Female Male Female Male Female Male Female Male 
Rohingya 171,285 171,285 27,342 27,342 99,716 108,781 38,961 38,961 796 670 - - 
Children (0-17 years) Adult (18-59 years) Elderly (>59 years) 
Total Female Total Male Female Male Female Male Female Male 
Bangladeshi 62,580 57,751 62,450 57,646 130 105 - - 
PART II: SECTOR STRATEGIES

36 
PART II: SECTOR STRATEGIES 
In 2019, the education sector will work with the 
authorities, including the Ministry of Primary and 
Mass Education (MoPME) as well as the Cox’s Bazar 
District Primary Education Office to provide learning 
opportunities for refugee children and youth and 
support school infrastructure and capacity in the host 
community. 
Quality: The quality of teaching and learning interventions 
are poor partly due to a lack of standardized teaching 
and learning materials for refugees. Against this 
background, to maximise the available space and to 
enable differentiated learning, a range of approaches 
may be applied, including an increase in contact hours28 
for learners and clustering of learning centers by 
grouping 4-6 learning centres in each cluster. Learners 
will be grouped according to competency level. 
To mitigate the effects of the influx on the host community, 
system strengthening efforts will be undertaken, as 
well as rehabilitation of school infrastructure, provision 
of education supplies, and professional development 
of para-teachers working in host community schools. 
The development of a comprehensive and continuous 
teacher professional development scheme by the 
Education Sector will build the capacity of refugee 
instructors and eventually reduce the reliance on 
Bangladeshi teachers leaving host community 
government schools. 
Access: The focus will be to provide unenrolled children 
and youth with learning opportunities while sustaining 
existing interventions for enrolled students (including 
learning facilities and services that are already in place). 
Access to learning will be provided through constructing 
new learning facilities with gender-segregated WASH 
facilities, as well as through alternative learning 
modalities such as home-based learning spaces that 
utilize community WASH facilities. Mobile learning and 
other outreach services, including youth tutors, will help 
rationalize space and align with 2019 macro-planning 
efforts by the Site Management Sector. 
To prioritise the provision of learning facilities, the Sector 
is guided by a gap analysis highlighting the camps with 
the greatest need. This is supplemented by assessment 
findings to ensure that the most vulnerable children and 
youth are reached, including those with disabilities and 
those exposed to risks such as early marriage, child 
labour, and delinquency. The Education Sector will 
continue to strengthen the capacity and engagement 
of camp level education focal points to ensure effective 
coordination of priority interventions. 
Youth and community participation: In collaboration 
with the Protection Sector, including sub-sectors, 
the Education Sector will develop programming for 
adolescents and youth to ensure learning progression 
and enable opportunities for developing transferable 
skills. Adolescent and youth programming will support 
assessment and placement into age-appropriate 
learning pathways to improve literacy, numeracy and 
life skills. Other sectors, including Food Security Sector, 
will support youth with vocational training opportunities. 
Promoting participation and community building will be 
a priority in 2019 in both refugee camps and in the host 
community. To improve the participatory engagement 
by the community in learning, School Management 
Committees and Community Education Committees 
will be strengthened on a number of topics including 
school management and Disaster Risk Reduction. 
Furthermore, caregivers (including adolescent 
caregivers) will participate in parenting education to 
support their child's learning, development, and wellbeing. 
RESPONSE STRATEGY 
25. Target for refugees: 3-14 yrs (100%); 15-18yrs (60%); 19-24yrs (7%). Target for host communities: 3-5yrs (70%); 6-14 yrs (55%); 15-18yrs: (30%), 19-24yrs: (6%).30 
26. Cox Bazaar Education Sector, Joint Education Needs Assessment: Rohingya Refugee in Cox’s Bazar, June 2018. Available here: https://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/ 
files/resources/cxb_jena_assessment_report-180607.pdf and Education Sector Gap Analysis; REACH/HCR MSNA. 
27. USAID, 18 October 2018, ‘Rapid Education and Risk Analysis (RERA)’, preliminary results sharing. 
28. Defined as the number of hours a child/student spends in a class with a teacher/learning facilitator.

37 
SITE MANAGEMENT AND 
SITE DEVELOPMENT 
SECTOR OBJECTIVES 
1. Support the Government of Bangladesh Camp in Charge Officials (CiC) in managing the 
Camps, ensuring equitable and safe access of refugees to standardized and monitored 
assistance and protection, against agreed standards, coordinating multi-hazard preparedness 
and community engagement and representation. Related to SO 1 
2. Holistically upgrade the settlement areas and their immediate surroundings, through 
community-participatory and mid-term macro planning, linked to construction and maintenance 
works that enable safe, dignified and resilient living conditions. Related to SO 1, 2 & 3 
3. Support informed humanitarian decision-making and synergized identification of needs, 
access to services and gaps among the refugees. Related to SO 1 & 2 
NEEDS ANALYSIS 
At the end of 2018, the majority of Rohingya refugees (99.3%) are settled in 
34 camps in the Cox’s Bazar District, across two Upazilas, including 23 camps 
forming the Kutupalung-Balukhali expansion site hosting more than 600,000 
refugees. The over-congestion and lack of planning of the spontaneous camps 
present serious protection risks, with density as high as 10m2 of land per person 
in camp 3 or 11m2 in camp 1W, compared to the initial target of providing 20m2 
(while the international standard is 45m2). Similarly, improving access, mitigating 
environmental risks, and installing and maintaining essential infrastructures for 
basic service provision are rendered very challenging by the topography and 
environment of the camp area consisting of steep slopes and flood-prone low-lying 
ground, although significant construction and mitigation efforts have been made in 
2018 with 10,800m of auxiliary roads and 143,888m of drainage built. The proximity 
of shelters creates fire hazards and continued risks of spread of communicable 
disease while deforestation has exacerbated risks of landslides and flooding in 
spite of 26,638 refugees among the ones most at-risk of landslides having been 
relocated to safer ground as of mid-November 2018. The Sector identified the 
need to efficiently and holistically plan the development of the camps, including 
retrospective reorganization and decongestion of existing camp areas, to reach 
minimum standards. Based on calculations of population density and site analysis 
of land habilitability, it is estimated that, if reorganized and planned, the camp area 
should be able to accommodate all current refugees with an average 20m2 per 
person. The current camp living conditions reportedly intensify psychosocial and 
mental distress and increase community tensions and prevalence of Gender- 
Based Violence (GBV). 
Competition for resources between refugees and host community is exacerbating 
tensions due to perceived loss of livelihood and deteriorating living conditions 
in the immediate surrounding of the camps, despite some assistance aimed at 
host communities. Community representation is limited in most camps. Aside from 
committees established in the registered refugee camps, Shalbagan and camp 4 
extension, the main community leaders, mahjis, are mostly appointed men, with 
FUNDING REQUIRED 
USD98.7M 
POPULATION TARGETED29 
1.24M 
906,512 
Rohingya Refugees 
335,930 
Bangladeshi Host Community 
07 
Sector Projects 
18 
Sector Partners 
CONTACT 
Oriane Bataille 
smcxb.coord@gmail.com 
Government of Bangladesh 
RRRC 
DISAGGREGATED DATA
Children (0-4 years) Children (5-11 years) Children (12-17 years) Adult (18-59 years) Elderly (>59 years) 
Total Female Total Male Female Male Female Male Female Male Female Male Female Male 
Rohingya 471,386 435,125 81,586 81,586 99,716 108,781 63,456 63,456 208,498 163,172 18,130 18,130 
Children (0-17 years) Adult (18-59 years) Elderly (>59 years) 
Total Female Total Male Female Male Female Male Female Male 
Bangladeshi 174,684 161,246 96,076 88,685 73,367 67,723 5,241 4,837 
PART II: SECTOR STRATEGIES

38 
In 2019, the Sector will extend its support to the 
Government of Bangladesh notably the Office of the RRRC, 
Armed Forces Division, Local Government Engineering 
Department (LGED) and Rural Electrification Board. 
Site management support to CiC will continue across the 
34 camps, with a focus on enhancing the engagement 
and resilience of the refugees, enabling a protective 
and dignified camp environment, notably throughout 
the monsoon season, and continuously strengthening 
the capacities of actors involved in site management 
and partners, aiming at reinforced localization and 
sustainability, notably through capacity building. UNHCR 
will continue to provide staffing and equipment support 
to the office of the Refugee Relief and Repatriation 
Commissioner (RRRC) and CiCs in 2019. Site management 
support, provided by humanitarian agencies, will consist 
of the reinforced coordination and monitoring of services 
and facilities, including identification of gaps and needs 
in coordination with all sectors. Enhanced communication 
with communities and accountability will be implemented 
in 2019, in partnership with the Communication with 
Communities (CwC) working group, notably reinforced 
complaints and feedback mechanisms in the camps, as well 
as increased community engagement and establishment 
of a community representation system, in coordination 
with the Protection Sector, Gender in Humanitarian 
Action and CwC working groups. The Sector will continue 
advocating for adequate living conditions in the camps, 
while mainstreaming protection and gender throughout 
its response. Building upon lessons learnt from 2018, SMS 
agencies will consolidate multi-hazard preparedness and 
response camp plans and involve the targeted populations 
in community-based risk assessments and mitigation 
activities as well as continue carrying small scale hazardrelated 
incidents assessments, continuously inform the 
communities about the risks and coordinate emergency 
preparedness and response efforts at camp-level. 
Macro-planning: Working under the leadership of the Site 
Planning Taskforce chaired by the RRRC, the Sector will 
also aim to improve the physical living conditions in the 
camps by defining joint and equitable approaches at the 
macro (settlement), meso (camp) and micro (community) 
scales to be implemented in 2019 and beyond. The 
macro settlement strategy established in 2018 will be the 
roadmap for the reorganization of the camp areas in 2019, 
underpinning the quality improvement and rationalization 
of services across the camps, and sector members will 
support its implementation in coordination with other 
sectors and actors such as LGED, that will be the recipient of 
the recently allocated World Bank and Asian Development 
Bank funds to build infrastructure in the camps. Communityparticipatory 
camp-based site plans will be developed for 
targeted upgrading, enhanced accessibility and better 
distribution of service as well as agreed minimum space 
standards and mitigation of hazards. 
Site development, site improvement, environment and 
lighting: Another priority will be to ensure the construction 
and maintenance of infrastructures at both the camp and 
community scale, notably through the Site Maintenance 
Engineering Project (SMEP) and partners, using a 
combination of machinery and incentives, learning lessons 
from existing projects, designs, construction methods and 
seasonal constraints, and improving techniques as well as 
using more durable materials. These works will include 
all weather safe pedestrian networks, bridges, slope 
stabilization and drainage that respond to the needs to 
include all groups of populations. Environmental protection 
will also be at the heart of the Sector strategy in 2019, in 
coordination with the Food Security Sector. There will be 
a concerted effort to better link these works to livelihood 
creation and skills development through cash for work 
schemes involving both refugee and host communities. 
In addition, the Sector will maintain a uniform street 
lighting coverage, targeted at key locations determined 
by community focus groups and site planners’ guidance 
and based on the recommendation of the Energy and 
Environment Technical Working Group (EETWG), to ensure 
a protective environment. 
Assessments and monitoring of the camp living 
conditions will be regularly conducted, in coordination 
with the Protection Sector and ISCG, to support response 
planning and implementation for the refugees. This will 
include refugee population counting, site profiling and 
service coverage analysisin camps, multi-hazard risk and 
vulnerability analysis, facilities mapping as well as capacity 
building. Efforts to harmonize data collection and reporting 
will continue. 
RESPONSE STRATEGY 
limited or no inclusion of women, youth, elderly, and persons with disabilities. Accountability and Communicating with 
Communities initiatives including complaints and feedback mechanisms are yet to be scaled up and extended to all the 
refugee population. With the ongoing mapping of facilities, undertaken under the leadership of the ISCG in coordination 
with all sectors, there will be a need to ensure enhanced and updated camp-based service mapping to identify key gaps 
and ensure an equitable and harmonized service delivery across all camps. 
PART II: SECTOR STRATEGIES 
29. The Sector will target the entire refugee population for monitoring and assessments activities and half of the host communities for Disaster Risk Reduction, cash for 
work, social cohesion, protection of environment and improvement activities.

39 
HEALTH 
SECTOR OBJECTIVES 
1. Improve equitable access to and utilization of quality lifesaving and comprehensive primary and 
secondary health services for crisis-affected populations with special focus on sexual reproductive, 
maternal, neonatal, child and adolescent health; mental health and psychosocial support; and 
non-communicable diseases. Related to SO 1, 2 & 3 
2. Ensure the prevention and timely response to outbreaks of diseases with epidemic potential and 
prepare for other health emergencies including monsoon and cyclone. Related to SO 1 & 2 
3. Encourage healthy living, improve health seeking behaviour and utilisation of essential service 
package among refugees and host populations through community engagement, with special 
attention to gender considerations and vulnerable groups. Related to SO 1, 2 & 3 
4. Strengthen health sector coordination and information management with a focus on rational and 
accountable health service delivery systems, including monitoring of minimum standards and the 
quality of the services provided. Related to SO 3 
NEEDS ANALYSIS 
Health facility utilization is within the normal range of 2-4 consultations per person 
per year, however each functional 24/7 primary health care center serves 54,000 
refugees (the standard is 1:25,000). Marginalized and vulnerable groups are not 
accessing health services. Temporary health infrastructure challenges continuity 
of services and adherence to minimum standards for services and staffing 
and quality of care in health facilities is a concern. Availability of treatment for 
non-communicable disease, Mental Health and Psychosocial Support (MHPSS) 
services and specialized services (eye-care, geriatric care, oral healthcare 
and services for people with disabilities and palliative needs) remain limited. 
Community outreach requires harmonization. Support is needed to strengthen 
host community facilities and a mechanism is needed to cover referral costs to 
avoid burden on government facilities. 
There is a need to support the Ministry of Health to extend regular national 
health programmes to cover the Rohingya population and to streamline health 
coordination particularly at Upazila and camp level. Access to non-communicable 
diseases treatment and essential comprehensive reproductive, maternal and 
new-born health services remain a major concern. There is a need to strengthen 
sexual and reproductive health, including access to safe, voluntary family planning 
and maternal and new-born health services. Just 43% of deliveries among the 
affected populations occurred in facilities reflecting both demand and access 
issues. Newborn care is poor, especially at community level and referral linkages 
need to be improved. The SRH needs for high-risk and special need populations 
including sex workers, survivors of gender-based violence and adolescents are 
yet to be addressed. Progress was made in routine immunization, but coverage 
remains insufficient in some areas. The highest proportional disease morbidity 
is for acute respiratory infections; unexplained fever and acute water diarrhea; 
surveillance needs to be maintained and supported by laboratory services. 
Ensuring facility-based readiness for monsoon and cyclone season, including risk 
of outbreaks, requires substantive investment. Existing information management 
systems need to be evaluated and streamlined for improved monitoring of health 
status of affected populations and health service delivery. Protection services 
and linkages with health facilities need strengthening. 
FUNDING REQUIRED 
USD88.8M 
POPULATION TARGETED 
1.24M 
906,512 
Rohingya Refugees 
335,930 
Bangladeshi Host Community 
28 
Sector Projects 
49 
Sector Partners 
CONTACT 
Dr Balwinder Sing 
coord_cxb@who.int 
Government of Bangladesh 
Civil Surgeon (Ministry of Health) 
DISAGGREGATED DATA
Children (0-4 years) Children (5-11 years) Children (12-17 years) Adult (18-59 years) Elderly (>59 years) 
Total Female Total Male Female Male Female Male Female Male Female Male Female Male 
Rohingya 471,386 435,125 81,586 81,586 99,716 108,781 63,456 63,456 208,498 163,172 18,130 18,130 
Children (0-17 years) Adult (18-59 years) Elderly (>59 years) 
Total Female Total Male Female Male Female Male Female Male 
Bangladeshi 174,684 161,246 96,076 88,685 73,367 67,723 5,241 4,837 
PART II: SECTOR STRATEGIES

40 
WHO co-chairs the Health Sector response with the the Civil 
Surgeon of the district of Cox’s Bazar (Ministry of Health) with 
support of the coordination centre under the Directorate 
General of Health Service. In 2019, the Sector will adopt 
a systems strengthening approach to programming, in 
which localization of response actors and decentralization 
of the respose will be a major focus. To improve equitable 
access to and utilization of lifesaving and comprehensive 
primary and secondary health services for crisis-affected, 
the Sector will strengthen provision, quality and utilization 
of essential primary health care service packages at health 
posts and primary health centers (in line with defined 
minimum package of primary health services) as well as at 
government primary health facilities (in line with essential 
package of services). In 2019, the Sector will ensure that 
sufficient facilities remain operational including overnight; 
will consolidate and rationalize health services, and will 
strengthen monitoring through a robust field coordination 
structure and improved information management systems, 
including community based surveillance, to continuously 
identify gaps and areas requiring improvement. 
Expanding utilization of health services, particularly for 
vulnerable groups, requires attaining full coverage of 
standardized community outreach activities to allow for 
timely risk identification, consistent referral, defaulter 
tracing and continuous health promotion activities. 
Community engagement is critical to supporting affected 
populations to live healthy lives and provides a valuable 
entry point to address health seeking behavior particularly 
among vulnerable groups such as elderly and disabled 
people, persons living with chronic diseases, and mental 
health conditions. Efforts to address demand side barriers 
must be met by improvement in availability, accessibility 
and continuity of care for non-communicable diseases 
and mental health and psychosocial support services at 
primary health centres and at community level. The Sector 
will integrate mental health support into primary health 
centres. 
Regarding sexual reproductive, maternal, neonatal, 
child and adolescent health, the Sector will expand the 
services from Minimum Initial Service Package (MISP) to 
comprehensive Sexual and Reproductive Health (SRH) 
including health response to Gender-Based Violence 
(GBV), by strengthening existing health facilities to provide 
24/7 Emergency Obstetric and Newborn Care (EmONC) 
with stronger referral pathways. The Sector will ensure 
provision of continuous supply of SRH supplies, and 
will coordinate capacity building efforts for healthcare 
providers. Minimizing loss of life cannot be achieved 
without strengthening the referral systems and funding 
mechanism for emergency and specialized health care 
services. The sector will strengthen Maternal and Perinatal 
Death Surveillance and Review for emergencies. Referrals 
to protection services will also be strengthened through 
improved dissemination of protection referral pathways, 
including for gender based violence. 
Sustaining support for the field hospitals is a priority for 
the Health Sector, to ensure surgical needs are met and to 
reduce the strain on government hospitals. Public health/ 
preventive measures must also be sustained and the 
Sector is committed to scaling up routine immunization 
among both Rohingya and host community children and 
pregnant women. Investments in disease early warning and 
surveillance will persist in 2019, alongside strengthening of 
district public health laboratories, to facilitate preparedness 
for and early detection of eventual disease outbreaks. 
WASH in health facilities will be supported and a system 
for medical waste management needs to be implemented 
as a priority. The Health Sector will also work closely with 
the district health authorities to extend regular national 
health programmes (including TB and HIV) to cover 
Rohingya population. Linkages with the Nutrition Sector 
will be built to reduce the referral gap between Nutrition 
and Health Sector facilities and address the chronic and 
acute nutritional needs of the Rohingya refugees and host 
communities. 
RESPONSE STRATEGY 
PART II: SECTOR STRATEGIES 
Photo Credit: UNHCR / Roger Arnold / 2017

41 
NUTRITION 
SECTOR OBJECTIVES 
1. To reduce excess mortality and morbidity among boys and girls under 5 years old, Pregnant 
and Lactating Women (PLW) and other vulnerable groups through provision of life-saving 
interventions to treat Severe and Moderate Acute Malnutrition. Related to SO 2 
2. To reduce the burden of malnutrition among boys, girls, Pregnant and Lactating Women 
(PLW) and other vulnerable groups through the strengthening and scale up of malnutrition 
prevention interventions. Related to SO 2 
3. To strengthen the collective Nutrition Sector response through timely collection and analysis 
of nutrition data, information management and effective coordination. Related to SO 1, 2 & 3 
NEEDS ANALYSIS 
The Nutrition Sector partners provide lifesaving interventions and scale up 
nutrition services across all camps to prevent mortality and ensure nutrition 
wellbeing of the target population. 
The overall malnutrition rate is below the WHO emergency threshold of >15%, 
but within the serious category according to the SMART nutrition surveys 
conducted in April/May 2018. The findings indicated a decline of Global Acute 
Malnutrition (GAM) in makeshift camps from 19.3% October/November 2017 
to 12.0%, while remaining almost unchanged from 14.3% to 13.6% in Nayapara 
Registered Camp (Nayapara). Anemia among children 6-23 months (>50%) 
and stunting (low height for age) among children 0-59 months (>40%) remains 
a major concern. 
Negative contributing factors are poor dietary diversity due to limited options 
in food security interventions and livelihood opportunities. Only 7.3% of 
children (6-23 months) in the makeshift camps and 29.7% in Nayapara were 
reported to have received minimum acceptable diets. Sub-optimal infant and 
young child feeding practices are reported in makeshift camps with at almost 
50% children (0-6 months) in the makeshift camps and 26% in Nayapara not 
exclusively breastfed and 45% of infants in the makeshift camps and 24% in 
Nayapara not timely introduced to breast feeding at birth. Though modest 
gains were observed in the reduction of diseases burden among children >5 
years the negative impact of the monsoon season led to potential elevated 
incidences of water related infections. The nutrition problems among the 
Rohingya population require to maintain, further scale up and improve quality 
of nutrition services and effective multi-sectoral collaboration. 
FUNDING REQUIRED 
USD48.1M 
5% 
Disaster Preparedness 
Regular 
POPULATION TARGETED30 
347,590 
303,336 
Rohingya Refugees 
44,254 
Bangladeshi Host Community 
08 
Sector Projects 
15 
Sector Partners 
CONTACT 
Ingo Neu 
ineu@unicef.org 
Government of Bangladesh 
Civil Surgeon (Ministry of Health) 
DISAGGREGATED DATA
Children (0-4 years) Children (5-11 years) Children (12-17 years) Adult (18-59 years) Elderly (>59 years) 
Total Female Total Male Female Male Female Male Female Male Female Male Female Male 
Rohingya 204,510 98,826 94,951 98,826 65,628 43,931 
Children (0-17 years) Adult (18-59 years) Elderly (>59 years) 
Total Female Total Male Female Male Female Male Female Male 
Bangladeshi 22,451 21,803 20,948 21,803 1,503 - 
PART II: SECTOR STRATEGIES

42 
The Nutrition Sector strategy and activities are led by 
the Civil Surgeon’s office in Cox’s Bazar, in cooperation 
with the Institute of Public Health Nutrition under the 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Sector will 
continue operating facilities and services established 
in 2018, ensuring that malnourished children under 5, 
PLW and other vulnerable persons will be identified, 
effectively referred for treatment and followed up after 
completion of their treatment. In 2019, there will be more 
focus on improving quality of nutrition services, including 
outreach, referral and follow-up services. Fragmentation 
of services will be tackled and the Nutrition Sector aims 
to ensure stronger integration of nutrition services as 
well as with other sectors. A restructuring of facilities 
is planned to ensure continuum of care by integrating 
Targeted Supplementary Feeding Programmes (TSFP) and 
Outpatient Therapeutic Programmes and other nutrition 
facilities. Strengthening of services will continue through 
the application of standardized tools, roll out of training 
and regular re-training for all staff in all facilities, as well 
as supportive supervision and coaching to ensure that 
knowledge, skills and confidence of all staff will enable 
them to provide high quality services. 
In addition, the Nutrition Sector will significantly strengthen 
preventive actions to reduce the risk of children under 5, 
PLW and other vulnerable groups to become malnourished. 
It will include the provision of BSFP, a stronger focus 
and strategy for the effective application of Infant and 
Young Child Feeding (IYCF) services at household levels 
(dissemination of information, etc.), through community 
groups and/or meetings to inform about hygiene, behavioral 
and other issues affecting nutrition. This will be planned 
and implemented in cooperation with other sectors such 
as GBV, Protection, Child Protection, Education, etc. 
wherever possible. Finally, one-on-one IYCF counseling to 
be provided in all OTPs and TSFPs. 
Other activities will address micronutrient deficiencies 
through Vitamins A campaigns, the provision of Iron and 
Folic Acid or micronutrient supplementation to adolescent 
girls and de-worming activities, in coordination with the 
Health Sector. 
The Nutrition Sector will continue to strengthen coordination 
and collaboration of sector partners to ensure highquality 
services are available and easily accessible to the 
beneficiaries, and to remove overlaps or gaps. In addition 
to coordination and technical working group meetings in 
Cox's Bazar, the Nutrition Sector will strengthen camp level 
coordination of nutrition partners, and continue to support 
the integration of facilities and services in the camps. 
Improvement of monitoring and data analysis tools 
and the regular collection of evidence will continue, 
including a number of assessments, to guide the sector 
response. The Nutrition Sector will study the perceptions, 
knowledge, attitude and behaviors of the communities, 
establishing a better understanding of the relevant sociocultural, 
religious and other factors that influence their 
understanding and behavior. Based on this knowledge 
existing IYCF and other materials might be revised and 
the communication approach with the communities 
modified. The Nutrition Sector will establish feedback and 
communication mechanisms, enabling the communities to 
have a voice in planning and monitoring of the quality and 
effectiveness of nutrition services. 
RESPONSE STRATEGY 
PART II: SECTOR STRATEGIES 
30. The people in need for each specific nutrition interventions; acute malnutrition treatment, micronutrient supplementation, Blanket Supplementary Feeding Programmes 
(BSFP) and promotion of appropriate Maternal, Infant and Young Child feeding (MIYCF) practices through counselling were calculated based on the estimated 
proportion of targeted population, prevalence of acute malnutrition based on round 2 SMART survey results plus the anticipated incidence. In determining the overall 
people in need, the highest number for each target group was considered in order to ensure that all the targeted population is reached through the nutrition interventions. 
Photo Credit: ISCG / Nayana Bose / 2018

43 
WATER,SANITATION AND HYGIENE 
SECTOR OBJECTIVES 
1. Ensure effective, sufficient and equitable provision of life saving water and sanitation services 
for targeted men, women, boys and girls. Related to SO 2 & 3 
2. Ensure that all targeted women, men, girls and boys have the means and are encouraged 
to adopt individual and collective measures increasing health seeking behaviors to mitigate 
public health risks for the well-being of the affected population. Related to SO 2 
3. Ensure that all WASH assistance promotes protection, safety and dignity of targeted men, 
women, boys and girls with focus on sustainable resilience-building approaches. Related to 
SO 1 & 3 
NEEDS ANALYSIS 
Equitable access to safe water: 73% of hand pumps are functional, with a ratio of 1 
water point to 47 persons. While this is well within the standard of 1 water point to 
maximum 250 persons, water quality issues, highly uneven coverage (with many 
people having to travel long distances to reach the waterpoints), water trucking in 
the Teknaf camps, yield and quality of shallow tube wells mean that overall target 
standards for water supply have not yet been met, and much remains to be done in 
2019. Some 56% of households have water access challenges, including distance 
and queuing time with significantly higher rates in the Teknaf camps. Tubewells 
are vulnerable to floods and landslides. Evidence shows that high contamination 
levels of water are found at the tube well spout, and at household level which likely 
occurs during transport, and storage. 25% of water samples from the source and 
70% from households are contaminated. Water stress during the dry season has 
been recorded where families access less than 15 liter per day (l/p/d) especially in 
the Teknaf area where there is little or no groundwater. 
Access to sanitation: There is still an insufficient amount of safe and dignified 
sustainable sanitation facilities. 53% of households have access challenges 
including distance, overcrowding, location, and overflowing. 49% of girls and 40% 
of women reported feeling unsafe using latrine facilities, 40% and 34% respectively 
for bathing facilities. Women and girls are adopting coping mechanisms in the form 
of makeshift bathing areas within their living shelters and not using latrines at night. 
The terrain, construction limitations, available usable space and the unplanned 
nature of settlements have compounded the constraints in number and size of 
pits, emptying, transportation, management and treatment of fecal sludge from the 
thousands of latrines across the camps. About one third of the population dispose 
of solid waste in an indiscriminate manner and waste often ends up in the main 
drains resulting in blockages/flooding. 
Hygiene and community engagement: Hygiene practices remain low as evidenced 
by the lack of soap for hand washing (35% of interviewed households) and 
evidence of open defecation, especially by children (65% of households). This is 
compounded with a high population density and overcrowding which increase the 
risk of disease. The coverage of hygiene promoters, particularly females, across 
the population remains low due to, among other factors, the skills and language 
FUNDING REQUIRED 
USD136.7M 
10% 
Disaster Preparedness 
Regular 
POPULATION TARGETED31 
1.05M 
768,321 
Rohingya Refugees 
284,174 
Bangladeshi Host Community 
22 
Sector Projects 
38 
Sector Partners 
CONTACT 
Bob Bongomin / Asif Arafat 
bbongomin@unicef.org / washsecco-
cox@bd-actionagainsthunger.org 
Government of Bangladesh 
Department of Public Health and Engineering 
DISAGGREGATED DATA
Children (0-4 years) Children (5-11 years) Children (12-17 years) Adult (18-59 years) Elderly (>59 years) 
Total Female Total Male Female Male Female Male Female Male Female Male Female Male 
Rohingya 399,527 368,794 69,149 69,149 84,515 92,198 53,783 53,783 176,714 138,298 15,366 15,366 
Children (0-17 years) Adult (18-59 years) Elderly (>59 years) 
Total Female Total Male Female Male Female Male Female Male 
Bangladeshi 147,771 136,404 81,274 75,023 62,063 57,289 4,434 4,092 
PART II: SECTOR STRATEGIES

44 
Under the leadership of Department of Public Health 
Engineering (DPHE), the Sector has developed its needs 
analysis and strategy taking into consideration the best 
practices from the 2018 emergency interventions. Work 
will continue with area focal agencies, camp focal points 
in coordination with site management and CiCs for service 
improvement, preparedness and response measures, 
consolidation and rationalization. The strategy focuses on 
life saving WASH assistance, resilient building, community 
engagement, safety, dignity and ownership with specific 
focus on the consultation and interest of women and girls. 
Acute Watery Diarrhea (AWD) and other communicable 
diseases remain key concerns for the Sector. 
Improved water services: The sector will prioritize 
installation of new deep tube wells and production wells 
with pipe networks in 140 water distribution zones as well as 
expanding small and medium-scale surface water systems 
with monitoring of aquifers and testing of water quality at 
source and household levels. Community engagement will 
be integral during design and implementation of any water 
distribution system. 
Improved environmental sanitation: There is a need to 
significantly invest in improving the quality and sustainability 
of latrines, focusing on gender-sensitive construction 
and community consultation. Further investment will be 
directed towards sustainable, technical and culturally 
appropriate designs for latrines and bathing facilities, 
improved sludge management (sewer networks) requiring 
about 100 acres and on-site fecal sludge treatment options 
for lower operations burden of latrines. Attention will go 
to activities that manage solid waste in camps and host 
communities and assessment of motivational factors 
to segregate waste at household and disposal sites, 
operation and maintenance of landfill. 
In the host communities, modified Community-Based 
Total Sanitation approaches will be scaled up to construct 
household latrines while overall programming will balance 
service provision with cash based modalities where 
feasible. 
Adaptation of individual and collective health-seeking 
behaviours: The sector will support significant capacity 
building for WASH actors in hygiene promotion; a 
comprehensive mapping of hygiene promoters at each 
camp level will identify gaps and ensuring minimum 
standards are met. The sector will continue to support 
the Core Facilitators Team as a capacity building modality, 
training key individuals from WASH actors in topics such 
as behavior change theories and approaches, community 
engagement and participation and cross-cutting issues 
like protection and gender. Additional capacity building 
will focus on children and on provision of awareness on 
menstrual hygiene management. In collaboration with CwC 
and Health, the WASH Sector will design a mechanism for 
monitoring behavior change, including health seeking 
behaviors and disease indicators. 
RESPONSE STRATEGY 
PART II: SECTOR STRATEGIES 
31. The Sector targets all people in need. The WASH sector has the capacity to reach the population and respond to all needs in terms of water sanitation and hygiene 
services of one sort or another. 
Photo Credit: IOM / Abdullah Al Mashrif / 2018 
required to communicate and engage the Rohingya communities. The coverage of hygiene top-up kits (consumable 
items like soap) and menstrual hygiene management materials remains sub-optimal. 

45 
SHELTER AND NON-FOOD ITEMS (NFI) 
SECTOR OBJECTIVES 
1. Provide lifesaving emergency Shelter/NFI support to households affected by natural disasters 
or other shocks. Related to SO 2 
2. Improve living conditions, contributing to reduced suffering, disaster risk reduction, and 
enhanced protection, dignity, and safety. Related to SO 1 & 2 
3. Improve social cohesion and enhance resilience. Related to SO 3 
4. Promote use of sustainable solutions to reduce imapce on the environment. Related to SO 3 
NEEDS ANALYSIS 
Camps and sites remain congested seriously impacting physical and psychological 
well-being, especially of children, women, and persons with disabilities. The round 
12 Needs and Population Monitoring (NPM) report indicates an average area of 
18.76 m2 per person, significantly lower than the Sphere standard recommended 
for site planning of 45m2 per person. Accordingly, most shelters do not adhere 
to the covered living space of 3.5m2 per person. Moreover, the lack of adequate 
lighting in shelters and public spaces was reported as a top safety concern 
followed by danger or violence when collecting firewood. Female key informants 
highlighted that the recent monsoon season had weakened the shelters. Bamboo 
has also deteriorated due to beetle infestation, resulting in a situation in which 
shelters can easily be broken into. Several such cases resulting in thefts were 
reported. Female key informants also emphasized the discomfort in existing 
shelters due to humidity, especially during the hottest portions of the day. Over 
22 million bamboo culms have been used by humanitarian agencies during the 
last year32. The push to address urgent humanitarian needs, at the peak of the 
response and for monsoon preparedness, has meant that much of the bamboo 
used is poor quality with limited durability. Exacerbating this, nearly all structures 
have been constructed using untreated bamboo in direct contact with the ground, 
creating perfect conditions for pests and rot. The above factors mean that the vast 
majority of bamboo within the camps will need to be replaced within the next 0-20 
months, a much shorter time frame than expected. Extensive pest damage can 
already be seen throughout the camps, particularly in culms harvested while still 
immature or during the monsoon season (which are particularly attractive to pests). 
The Shelter/NFI Sector partners carried out a shelter survey in July and August33 of 
2018 to further guide the Sector’s interventions. The findings align with the Shelter 
and NFI needs raised by the NPM Round 12 Report34. The shelter materials and 
disaster risk reduction training provided to the refugees in 2018 are insufficient 
for protection against adverse weather conditions. Refugees’ main concerns 
regarding their current shelters were related to strength of shelters, quality of 
materials, lack of private cooking and bathing spaces, and lack of ventilation and 
FUNDING REQUIRED 
USD128.8M 
4% 
Disaster Preparedness 
Regular 
POPULATION TARGETED 
1.03M 
906,512 
Rohingya Refugees 
125,000 
Bangladeshi Host Community 
16 
Sector Projects 
28 
Sector Partners 
CONTACT 
Tonja Klansek 
sheltercxb.coord@gmail.com 
Government of Bangladesh 
RRRC 
DISAGGREGATED DATA
Children (0-4 years) Children (5-11 years) Children (12-17 years) Adult (18-59 years) Elderly (>59 years) 
Total Female Total Male Female Male Female Male Female Male Female Male Female Male 
Rohingya 471,386 435,125 81,586 81,586 99,716 108,781 63,456 63,456 208,498 163,172 18,130 18,130 
Children (0-17 years) Adult (18-59 years) Elderly (>59 years) 
Total Female Total Male Female Male Female Male Female Male 
Bangladeshi 65,000 60,000 35,750 33,000 27,300 25,200 1,950 1,800 
PART II: SECTOR STRATEGIES

46 
The Office of the Refugee, Relief, and Repatriation 
Commission (RRRC) is the Sector’s government 
counterpart. The RRRC’s office plays a vital interlocutor 
role between the Government policies and the Sector’s 
strategies. The RRRC continues to advocate for improving 
the living conditions of the refugees. 
Emergency Shelter/NFI Preparedness and Response: 
Going forward, emergency Shelter/NFI preparedness and 
response remains high priority. The Cox’s Bazar district, 
situated on the Bay of Bengal, has witnessed devastating 
cyclones over the past decades. The existing shelters in 
the camps, excluding transitional and mid-term shelters, 
are predicted to resist wind speeds up to 40km/h. In 2018, 
Cox’s Bazar district witnessed mild wind gust speeds 
relative to 2017, 2016, and 2015 wind gust speeds of 65 
and 130 and 148 km/hr respectively. Bamboo provided 
in upgrade shelter kits in 2018 is deteriorating, further 
reducing the overall strength of shelters. 
The first quarter of 2019 will therefore prioritize the 
inspection of tie-down kits (TDK) provided in 2018 prior to 
the first cyclone season. It is important to ensure tie down 
ropes are properly fastened to resist uplifting forces. An 
additional TDK can be provided based on household 
needs assessment. In addition to TDK inspection, partners 
are highly advised to distribute wall-bracing kit (WBK) in 
areas with greater wind exposure. The WBK can increase 
the wind resistance of existing shelter by 50%, from 40 
to 60 km/hr. Technical assistance to refugees and post 
distribution monitoring by partners will ensure effective 
TDK and WBK interventions. 
Improving shelter – 2019 will be a pivotal year for 
rationalizing shelter response in consultation with the 
Government, taking into account considerations as 
regards safety, durability, cost and dignity. The shelter 
strategy will centre on sourcing and treating of bamboo 
and providing footings and rope to improve weather 
resistance. Transitional shelter assistance will be provided 
to households who previously received upgrade shelter 
kits (USK). This will include in-kind core items, a voucher 
system for optional items, and technical assistance to 
provide resilience against adverse weather shocks. The 
majority of the refugee caseload will be targeted with 
transitional shelter assistance. 
As a part of a structured site plan, mid-term shelters will be 
constructed in newly developed camps and less congested 
existing camps where the covered living space standard 
can be met. A mid-term shelter option is the construction 
of new shelter that meets minimum standards and requires 
skilled labour. This is not a final product but one step closer 
to reaching an improved structure. 
Sustainable Supply Chain of Bamboo: A bamboo supply 
chain assessment will be conducted at least twice 
in the year to inform the Sector on the available and 
prospective supply of mature bamboo over the five-year 
shelter construction period. The Sector will continue 
to advocate for the increased use of diverse bamboo 
species as well as other durable materials to spread the 
environmental load across different bamboo species and 
construction materials. The Sector also plans, with the help 
of the Bangladesh Forestry Research Insititute (BFRI), on 
supporting bamboo plantations in host communities to 
help improve the bamboo stock as well as the livelihoods 
of the individuals. 
The Shelter/NFI Sector will explore alternative approaches 
to in-kind NFI distribution. Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LPG) 
interventions and solar light home systems will continue 
to be provided in-kind as the market is not yet able to 
offer items with the required specifications and in needed 
quantity. The Sector will facilitate access to items available 
in the market. A full-fledged NFI needs and market 
assessment will therefore be required to further guide 
partners’ programming. NFI interventions will be informed 
by Post-Distribution Monitoring Mechanisms. 
RESPONSE STRATEGY 
privacy. Some refugees in Teknaf indicated the possibility of landlords increasing rent due to potential durable shelter 
interventions. It was reported that: 
• More than 78% of households assessed had purchased additional bamboo, tarpaulin and rope. 
• 62% of shelters visited during technical visits had no ventilation. 
• 76% of households paying rent in Teknaf assume that rent would increase if shelter size increases. Some 23% of 
households paying rent in Teknaf assume that they will not be allowed to carry out durable improvements while 24% 
of households assume the rent would increase. 
PART II: SECTOR STRATEGIES 
32. Shelter/NFI Sector, International Organization for Migration (IOM), Humanitarian Benchmark Consulting (HBC) and Humanitarian Bamboo, Humanitarian Bamboo Technical 
report: Increasing durability of Bamboo in the Rohingya Camps in Cox Bazar, Bangladesh, September 2018. Available here: https://www.humanitarianresponse.info/ 
en/operations/bangladesh/document/bamboo-inception-technical-reports 
33. Shelter/NFI Sector Bangladesh, Shelter Survey, August 2018. Available here: https://www.humanitarianresponse.info/en/operations/bangladesh/document/shelter-survey-
august-2018 
34. IOM-NPM, Site Assessment: Round 12, October 2018. Available at: https://www.humanitarianresponse.info/en/operations/bangladesh/assessment/needs-and-population-
monitoring-npm-bangladesh-round-12-site

47 
COMMUNICATION WITH COMMUNITIES 
SECTOR OBJECTIVES 
1. Strengthen coordination and advocacy towards the integration and reinforcement of 
Communication with Communities capacities and community engagement to ensure 
comprehensive accessibility to life-saving information and knowledge on rights and available 
resources by affected populations, across sectors. Related to SO 1, 2, & 3 
2. Establish aand reinforce needs-based, actionable, two-way and multi-sectoral communication 
resources and strengthen dissemination and access to information. Related to SO 1, 2, & 3 
3. Strengthen participation of, and accountability to affected women, men, girls and boys 
through effective community engagement, participatory approaches and functional feedback 
and complaint response mechanisms. Related to SO 1, 2 & 3 
NEEDS ANALYSIS 
In 2018, efforts by the CwC WG members have contributed to improving access to 
information, with 75% of respondents of latest studies demonstrating that access 
to information got easier in the last six months35. However, significant gaps remain 
in the dissemination, use of these materials across sectors/members as well as 
community engagement, particularly for vulnerable people. 
Despite progress made, more work needs to be done to meet the full needs for 
quality feedback and accountability mechanisms. Some mechanisms for collecting 
feedback or complaints and responding to them have already been put in place, 
especially by Site Management and CwC actors, but they are not standardized across 
all camps. Many organizations still rely on complaint boxes which are inaccessible 
to illiterate population and partners need further support to close the feedback loop 
by delivering trustworthy and actionable information back to the community. There 
is a distinct need to improve quality and extend the support through community 
facilities, e.g. info hubs, for providing a localized and reliable source of information, 
communication and accountability means. The most trusted information channeled 
for both men and women are community members or representatives and other inperson 
channels. However, there is need for much greater effort to make the info 
hubs more reliable36. 
Support is further required to ensure a consistent and dedicated approach to 
address language barriers. Only 31% of Rohingya people found that aid workers 
speak in a language that is understandable to them, and more than one-third of 
Rohingya refugees cannot understand a basic sentence in Chittagonian37. This 
confirms the importance of ensuring that general information tools and materials 
targeting the displaced population are presented in Burmese or Rohingya language. 
There remains a significant gap in communication means and an over-reliance on 
top-down communication through single channels. Community leaders still act as 
gatekeepers to information in camps. A more coordinated CwC response and greater 
advocacy for community engagement and accountability across sectors can benefit 
both refugees and the host communities. Assessment of communication needs for 
affected host communities is crucial to articulate a comprehensive understanding 
of the situation and address any tensions with the displaced population to promote 
peaceful coexistence both between and within different communities. Moreover, as 
the context shifts, more research or studies or assessments are required to fill in the 
changing information needs and knowledge gaps. 
FUNDING REQUIRED 
USD11M 
2% 
Disaster Preparedness 
Regular 
POPULATION TARGETED 
1.24M 
906,512 
Rohingya Refugees 
335,930 
Bangladeshi Host Community 
06 
Sector Projects 
13 
Sector Partners 
CONTACT 
Md. Mahbubur Rahman 
cxb.cwcwg@gmail.com 
Government of Bangladesh 
RRRC 
DISAGGREGATED DATA
Children (0-4 years) Children (5-11 years) Children (12-17 years) Adult (18-59 years) Elderly (>59 years) 
Total Female Total Male Female Male Female Male Female Male Female Male Female Male 
Rohingya 471,386 435,125 81,586 81,586 99,716 108,781 63,456 63,456 208,498 163,172 18,130 18,130 
Children (0-17 years) Adult (18-59 years) Elderly (>59 years) 
Total Female Total Male Female Male Female Male Female Male 
Bangladeshi 174,684 161,246 96,076 88,685 73,367 67,723 5,241 4,837 
PART II: SECTOR STRATEGIES

48 
CwC actors will continue to support the Refugee Relief and 
Repatriation Commissioner’s office and relevant partners to 
continue addressing the information and communication 
needs of both the Rohingya community and host community, 
with the following priorities, objectives and activities. 
Meeting the Complex Needs for Information: All involved 
agencies will adapt programming approaches to meet the 
changing information needs and communication preferences 
of all members of refugee and host communities. CwC 
workers will continue to support innovative methodologies 
to deliver clear, accessible and context appropriate content, 
language and information, including group information 
sessions, info hubs, outreach activities such as face-to-face 
information sharing, broadcasting audio-visual materials, 
research, study and assessment. 
Content Development and Sharing: In close consultation 
with government and district authorities relevant agencies 
will continue to develop community-led, tested and 
language- appropriate audio, video, and pictorial IEC 
materials. These tools, which will be in Burmese, Rohingya, 
Chittagonian and English language, will be easily accessible 
through the CwC online database Shongjog. Consistent 
with government policy, information for refugees / Forcibly 
Displacement Myanmar Nationals will not be presented in 
Bangla, the national language. The info hubs will be regularly 
equipped with updated CwC materials through continuous 
coordination with all sectors. CwC members will also 
engage in technical capacity building support for field staff, 
interpreters, volunteers and community representatives to 
communicate effectively and to ensure appropriate use of 
pictorial materials such as flash cards and animation. The 
challenge of poor radio network coverage, in the camp 
areas can be mitigated through on-going practice of off 
air listener groups. Advocacy will continue to improve the 
enabling environment and network coverage to ensure 
more real-time information sharing. 
Strengthening Feedback and Accountability Systems: 
Building on existing capacity on feedback and accountability 
mechanisms and in coordination with the SMSD Sector, the 
CwC WG will focus on establishing a standardized process 
including one-stop centres (at least one in each camp) 
by operationalizing the CwC Accountability Manifesto, 
developed in 2018. Through the info hubs (89 existing 
under the CwC WG and Protection and SM Sectors and 
around 50 planned) the one-stop centres will be operated 
to ensure accurate and timely information is provided to - 
and feedback/complaints collected from women, men, boys 
and girls in both refugee and local communities on different 
concerns including PSEA using multiple channels and 
subsequently effective resolution of the received feedback/ 
complaints by the respective agencies. 
Coordination: CwC WG will continue advocating and 
coordinating with diverse partners and stakeholders across 
sectors for wider integration and usage of CwC principles and 
reinforcement of effective communication and community 
engagement capacities. Provision of timely, accurate and 
relevant information would dispel rumours, and address 
misinformation both in camps and host communities. 
RESPONSE STRATEGY 
PART II: SECTOR STRATEGIES 
35. BBC Media Action, Cox Bazar, Bangaldesh, Sept. 2018, A Common Service Evaluation. Available at: https://www.humanitarianresponse.info/sites/www.humanitarianresponse.
info/files/documents/files/research_report_csp_evaluation_study.pdf. 75% of the respondents shared that access to information got easier in the last six months. 
36. Ground Truth Solution (GTS), August 2018, Cox’s Bazar Bulletin #1 Needs & Service, August 2018. Available at: https://www.humanitarianresponse.info/sites/www. 
humanitarianresponse.info/files/documents/files/bangladesh_bulletin_needsservices_082018.pdf 
37. Translators Without Borders, Cox’s Bazar, Bangladesh, Oct. 2018, Language comprehension in the Rohingya Refugee response. Available at: https://www.humanitarianresponse.
info/en/operations/bangladesh/document/language-lesson-what-we%E2%80%99ve-learned-about-communicating-rohingya
Photo Credit: ISCG / Nayana Bose / 2018

49 
EMERGENCY TELECOMMUNICATIONS 
SECTOR OBJECTIVES 
1. Increase the existing telecommunications capacity in the response areas to facilitate the 
safe, effective delivery of aid and strengthen the emergency preparedness and response 
capabilities of humanitarian actors. Related to SO 2 & 3 
2. Collaborate with inter-sector initiatives to improve affected communities’ access to vital 
information and communication services by implementing technical solutions and capacity 
building partners. Related to SO 1 & 2 
3. Increase the effectiveness of the humanitarian response through technical assistance, 
coordination, information sharing and facilitation activities. Related to SO 2 
NEEDS ANALYSIS 
The Emergency Telecommunications Sector (ETS) has upgraded the security radio 
infrastructure to cover all of Cox’s Bazar, the Kutupalong-Balukhali expansion site 
and all other camps during 2018 and is negotiating for the allocation of additional 
frequencies and the permission for NGOs to import very high frequency (VHF) 
radio equipment, so that NGOs can access VHF radios on an ETS provided 
backbone. As there is uncertainty regarding the mobile network coverage in the 
camps, the network should be maintained and the capacity increased to support 
operational use in 2019. 
As the humanitarian operations stabilize, the desire to coordinate closer to the camp 
level has been discussed and emerged as a need to support the decentralization of 
the response, requiring improved data connectivity and support in the operational 
areas including at the CiC offices. 
There is a need to strengthen the emergency telecommunications disaster 
preparedness and response capacity, as there are currently no prepositioned spares 
for the repeaters and a lack of prepared VHF handsets which can be deployed 
rapidly to support responders in the event of an emergency-systems redundancy 
and the skills of humanitarian actors to effectively use telecommunications tools to 
respond to a disaster needs to be improved. 
FUNDING REQUIRED 
USD1.1M 
ORGANIZATIONS 
TARGETED 
20 
342,569 
Rohingya Refugees 
120,331 
Bangladeshi Host Community 
01 
Sector Projects 
01 
Sector Partners 
CONTACT 
Min Sun 
min.sun@wfp.org 
Government of Bangladesh 
RRRC 
PART II: SECTOR STRATEGIES 

50 
The Government telecommunications regulator, 
Bangladesh Telecommunications Regulatory Commission, 
manages the licenses of telecommunications equipment 
and frequency spectrum. ETS will liaise with the 
Government to find reasonable ways to support field 
operations by maintaining the VHF network and increase 
the channels available in the operational areas by 
deploying telecommunications equipment and training for 
users. Telecommunications assets will be prepositioned for 
rapid deployment with the capacity to establish a mobile 
emergency coordination centre. 
Connectivity will be maintained in the two common 
humanitarian hubs established by the Logistics Sector at 
Madhur Chara and Leda. Internet services at the information 
hubs will be maintained and a point-to-point network will 
be deployed around the camp to provide connectivity for 
humanitarian actors and the CiC officers. 
In continued collaboration with the CwC WG, Services for 
Communities activities in the form of connectivity, audio 
visual and power equipment for the information hubs will 
continue to be supported in 2019. 
The ETC Connect app will be maintained as a lightweight 
feedback and reporting platform with case tracking 
functionality, additional development to tailor the back 
end according to the needs of the users will be carried 
out to provide a platform for complaints management and 
referral from the field to the office. 
Further work to increase the telecommunications capacity 
of the Cyclone Preparedness Programme (CPP) through 
technical advisory, equipment support and liaison with, and 
improved links to, the government disaster coordination 
mechanisms will be made to better connect all actors 
working in the response. 
RESPONSE STRATEGY 
PART II: SECTOR STRATEGIES 
Photo Credit: WFP / Patrick Shepherd / 2018

51 
LOGISTICS 
SECTOR OBJECTIVES 
1. Improve logistics operations based on incentivized and supported joint operational efforts 
and shared use of key logistics resources through the facilitation of coordinated efforts and 
strengthening of local logistics capacity. Related to SO 3 
2. Collect, produce and share timely and accurate data and information in support of humanitarian 
logistics operations, and to ensure transparency of all Logistics Sector activities. Related to 
SO 3 
3. Assess, design and implement logistics services to address commonly identified gaps and 
bottleneck in the supply chain, and enhance the humanitarian response through supplementary 
logistics support. Related to SO 3 
NEEDS ANALYSIS 
Logistics remains a major operational challenge in the Cox’s Bazar response. While 
Bangladesh has a well-established business environment with the availability of 
suppliers, transporters and storage capacity in large centres (e.g. Dhaka), logistics 
assets increasingly become scarce downstream in the chain. 
There is a continued need for increased logistics capacity within Cox’s Bazar. 
Warehouse space within the area of operation around the camps remains an 
immediate response gap impacting the humanitarian community’s capacity to 
effectively plan and deliver activities due to the lack of space available for new 
warehouses and the limited availability of an established storage network within 
Cox’s Bazar district. Storage capacity is a key variable in supply chain continuity 
due to its limited resilience to natural hazards. 
Moreover, Bangladesh has a typically effective inter-modal transport network 
including tarmac connection between major cities and a port structure that 
handled around 2.6mi TEUs (twenty-foot equivalent unit) in 2017, without additional 
impeding security risks. However, with the expansion of camps across Cox’s Bazar 
over the past year, heavy road congestion continues to be a limiting factor in the 
timely and reliable delivery of supplies along key routes. Secondary transport 
infrastructure in camps has been established as part of the response, however 
traffic limitations such tonnage regulation and infrastructure bottlenecks remain 
a constraint to supply delivery, and a major challenge for balancing inbound/ 
outbound movements. 
Finally, natural disasters such as cyclones are a likely event, and the yearly 
monsoons, whose severity and impact are critically important for the logistics 
operation, are a certainty. Both the continued access to and delivery of 
humanitarian relief items due to damaged infrastructure and restricted road access 
are a potential limiting consequence of a natural event. These hazards, which will 
remain an issue throughout the 2019 cyclone and monsoon seasons, have the 
potential of straining even further the local logistics capacity, such as the storage 
facilities which are used for humanitarian cargo. 
In summary, the major logistics constraints limiting humanitarian operations in 
Cox’s Bazar District currently are: 
1. Lack of available last mile storage capacity; 
2. Congestion along road infrastructure leading to refugee settlements and 
makeshift sites; 
3. Poor and insufficient vehicle access within refugee settlements and 
makeshift sites; and 
4. Minimal availability of logistics facilities, assets, infrastructure and expertise 
capable of remaining fully functional throughout the year. 
FUNDING REQUIRED 
USD2.8M 
ORGANIZATIONS 
TARGETED38 
60 
342,569 
Rohingya Refugees 
120,331 
Bangladeshi Host Community 
01 
Sector Projects 
01 
Sector Partners 
CONTACT 
Otávio Costa 
otavio.costa@wfp.org 
Government of Bangladesh 
RRRC 
PART II: SECTOR STRATEGIES

52 
In support of the Bangladesh government-led response, 
Logistics Sector aims to support humanitarian logistics 
and supply actors in addressing the above-mentioned 
challenges, the Logistics Sector operation is designed to 
provide: 
1. Dedicated coordination cell to strengthen 
horizontal cooperation among organizations and 
synchronization of effort and monitoring of supply chain 
challenges that may require joint advocacy or capacity 
building, remarkably, supporting organizations with the 
rationalization of their cargo handling/clearance process 
and training in relevant logistics gaps; 
2. Strength the attraction of local actors, such as 
national humanitarian organizations, to coordination 
forums and the use of common services; 
3. Establish and maintain Information Management 
(IM) support to collect, consolidate, analyse and share 
key information products on local, regional and national 
logistics capacities and the operating environment to 
ensure informed decision making based on the preparation 
of timely and accurate IM products such as the Logistics 
Capacity Assessments and Access Constraint maps; 
4. Assess gaps, design and implement common 
services for the handling of humanitarian cargo in Cox’s 
Bazar District whenever the gap is the result of a systemic 
limitation to address such gaps through individual efforts. 
Currently, these gaps are related to storage availability in 
the district which the Sector intends to continue addressing 
with its common storage services; 
5. Develop stand-by logistics asset capacity as 
part of natural disaster preparedness and supply chain 
continuity effort and assess and prepare for disruption 
risks in key logistics infrastructure; 
6. Support organizations - on bilateral or multilateral 
level-to strengthen their operational capacity through 
capacity building such as training (e.g. basic humanitarian 
logistics courses) and simulations (e.g. cyclone 
preparedness drill) or direct advisory in technical aspects 
of the operation. 
In line with the Logistics Cluster global vision and goals, 
Cox’s Bazar Logistics Sector will continuously aim at 
enhancing the logistics response through the preparation 
of locally driven logistics systems, the incentives to local 
level actors’ engagement and synchronization, provision 
of services in commonly identified gaps and shared 
information and best practices. Particularly, the Logistics 
Sector will actively direct its operation to avoid redundancy 
and long-term dependency of common services upon on 
an expected improvement of logistics capacity concomitant 
to the maturity of the operation. 
RESPONSE STRATEGY 
PART II: SECTOR STRATEGIES 
Photo Credit: ISCG / Nayana Bose / 2018 
38. The number of organizations reported by the sector as organizations in need is 140. The number to be shared is organization targeted by activities, this is 60 
organizations based on two indicators

53 
COORDINATION 
SECTOR OBJECTIVES 
1. Support Rohingya refugee response leadership and coordination to ensure an effective 
response. Related to SO 1, 2 & 3 
2. Promote a common understanding of context, needs, priorities, response progress and gaps. 
Related to SO 1, 2 & 3 
3. Lead advocacy and resource mobilization efforts for the Rohingya refugee response. Related 
to SO 1, 2 & 3 
4. Promote an integrated and multi-sector approach to protection and gender mainstreaming. 
Related to SO 1 
NEEDS ANALYSIS 
At national and Cox’s Bazar levels, the response for Rohingya refugees and affected 
host communities in Cox’s Bazar is led and coordinated by the Government of 
Bangladesh, who established a National Strategy on Myanmar Refugees and 
Undocumented Myanmar Nationals in 2013. That strategy established the National 
Task Force (NTF) at the Dhaka level, chaired by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
(MoFA), and including 29 Ministries and entities, which provides oversight and 
strategic guidance to the response. The RRRC, under the Ministry of Disaster 
Management and Relief (MoDMR), is in charge of operational coordination of the 
refugee response at the District level. 
To support the Government of Bangladesh in managing and responding to 
the crisis, humanitarian actors currently coordinate under the leadership of the 
Strategic Executive Group (SEG) at the Dhaka level, co-chaired by the UN Resident 
Coordinator, IOM, and UNHCR. The response is currently coordinated through a 
sector-based structure in collaboration with the RRRC, Deputy Commissioner, and 
relevant line ministries, which includes responding humanitarian actors: United 
Nations agencies, national and international NGOs, donors and other stakeholders. 
To ensure timely and efficient response, humanitarian access, a common analysis 
of needs, and a voice for the refugees and affected host communities, consistent 
and efficient information management, coordination (including coordination 
mechanisms at the upazila and camp level), communications and advocacy 
is needed. At the district level, support is currently provided by the Senior 
Coordinator who leads the Heads of Sub-Offices Group (HoSOG) and the Inter- 
Sector Coordination Group (ISCG). This is to ensure a multisectoral approach with 
close synergies among all these diverse actors, and with the core objective of 
timely, needs-based, and evidence-driven humanitarian assistance, efficient use 
of resources and avoiding duplication. 
While significant efforts have been made to strengthen coordination and to identify, 
address and solve critical issues, much more needs to be done in 2019 to clarify 
an efficient, fit for purpose coordination mechanism in order to adequately support 
FUNDING REQUIRED 
USD4.2M 
POPULATION TARGETED 
1.24M 
906,512 
Rohingya Refugees 
335,930 
Bangladeshi Host Community 
05 
Sector Projects 
05 
Sector Partners 
CONTACT 
Jon Hoisaeter 
seniorcoordinator@iscgcxb.org 
Government of Bangladesh 
DC, RRRC 
DISAGGREGATED DATA
Children (0-4 years) Children (5-11 years) Children (12-17 years) Adult (18-59 years) Elderly (>59 years) 
Total Female Total Male Female Male Female Male Female Male Female Male Female Male 
Rohingya 471,386 435,125 81,586 81,586 99,716 108,781 63,456 63,456 208,498 163,172 18,130 18,130 
Children (0-17 years) Adult (18-59 years) Elderly (>59 years) 
Total Female Total Male Female Male Female Male Female Male 
Bangladeshi 174,684 161,246 96,076 88,685 73,367 67,723 5,241 4,837 
PART II: SECTOR STRATEGIES 

54 
In 2019, coordination activities will focus primarily on the 
following: 
• Support SEG coordination work with the NTF, the donor 
and partner communities as well as other stakeholders 
in Dhaka. 
• Manage the response programme cycle: needs 
overviews and analysis, strategic planning and appeals 
(including contingencies), and response and needs 
monitoring. 
• Monitor and analyse access constraints, and engage 
relevant stakeholders to address them. 
• Manage data and information in support of humanitarian 
decision-making, advocacy and public information, 
resulting in regular information products. Continued work 
towards complementary databases such as multi-sector 
needs assessments, facility mapping and an assessment 
registry, for example. 
• Work with sectors and humanitarian partners to 
strengthen accountability and understanding of 
community capacities and preferences. 
• Advance efforts towards a roadmap to localization 
including through building the capacity of national 
partners to ensure sustainability of the response. 
• Galvanize agency and sector capacity in gender and 
protection to ensure mainstreaming across the response 
during all stages of the programme cycle. 
• Support the development of a Centrality of Protection 
Action Plan in collaboration with the Protection Sector/ 
actors and ensure it is regularly monitored. 
• Ensure adequate cyclone preparedness and 
contingency planning with sectors and humanitarian 
partners, including SIMEX prior to the cyclone seasons. 
• Liaise with key stakeholders inside and outside 
Bangladesh, including authorities, humanitarian partners, 
donors, and representatives of neighbouring countries, 
with a view to mobilize resources, promote humanitarian 
access, and advocate respect for international law. 
• Reinforce and operationalize decentralized coordination 
mechanisms through the continued management of the 
humanitarian hub in Ukhiya, and support to Upazila level 
coordination. 
RESPONSE STRATEGY 
humanitarian actors and the Government of Bangladesh, and to meet the emerging coordination requirements based 
on the evolving context and needs. 
In 2019, further clarification and strengthening of an efficient, fit for purpose coordination structure for the Rohingya 
refugee response will be undertaken to move towards an informed, evidence driven response, more integrated planning, 
and stronger prioritization. 
PART II: SECTOR STRATEGIES 
Photo Credit: ISCG / Nayana Bose / 2018

ANNEXES 
zzCross-Cutting Issues 
zzMonitoring Framework 
zzOrganizations and Funding Requirements 
Photo Credit: ISCG / Nayana Bose/ 2018

56 
Protection and Gender Mainstreaming 
Protection 
To strengthen the quality of essential services delivered by sectors and agencies, a comprehensive 
training, monitoring and evaluation work plan, focusing on mainstreaming protection, 
gender and accountability to affected population across the response, will be annexed to the 
Protection Sector strategy for 2019. Non-protection staff at field and operational levels will be 
trained on protection principles, including gender and accountability, GBV and child protection 
mainstreaming, Code of Conduct and PSEA. A system of protection focal points participating in 
other sectors, with structured ToRs and clear responsibilities, will be created in order to maintain 
continual dialogue and provide regular technical support to the various sector teams. Checklists, 
tip-sheets and other tools will be jointly produced with Sector Coordinators to guide their partners’ 
implementation. At policy and leadership level, the initiated sensitization and advocacy will 
continue to steer decision-making across sectors placing, and keeping protection at the centre 
of the response, as per the Protection Sector’s strategic objective number six. Protection mainstreaming 
efforts will focus on promoting meaningful access, safety and dignity in the provision 
of humanitarian aid, and, equal and meaningful representation, participation and leadership, in 
coordination with the Site Management Site Development (SMSD) Sector, which is still a severe 
gap in the Rohingya refugee response with only four camps currently having a participatory 
and elected camp committee. The equal involvement of women in decision making, their representation 
and empowerment paired with protection safeguards will be monitored. In terms 
of accountability, specific feedback and complaint mechanisms already in place will have to be 
extended to services and areas where they are either not present yet or ineffective. Innovative 
accountability and feedback mechanisms will be developed with communities and by the communities 
in coordination with the Communication with Communities Working Group and SMSD 
Sector. Among these, on PSEA specifically, the Sector will continue its participation and support 
to the PSEA Network, including by using a community-based approach in identifying a one-stop 
complaint shop in each camp. 
Child Protection partners will document and share good practices in participatory approaches 
that engage boys, girls and their caregivers in planning and monitoring interventions to meet 
their differentiated needs. The unique risks and barriers to participation experienced by adolescent 
boys and girls will be addressed through the formation of ‘Adolescent and Youth Hubs’, 
where young people will lead in monitoring, reporting, planning, delivery and evaluation. Partners 
will promote the recruitment and participation of female community volunteers in leadership 
structures and community mechanisms, and will train community-based groups, peer educators 
and adolescent clubs to inform children and caregivers on where to access key services, via 
accessible referral pathways. Appropriate child-centred complaints and feedback mechanisms 
will be put in place in all partner organizations, where they do not already exist, and all partners 
will monitor service usage disaggregated by sex, age and disability, as standard practice. Actors 
in other sectors will be trained on child protection mainstreaming and action plans agreed and 
monitored. 
In late 2017, hundreds of thousands of women, men, girls and boys took refuge in Bangladesh in 
a very short period of time and there was insufficient time to plan and design camps through an 
Age, Gender and Diversity Mainstreaming lens. There is currently limited access to gender sensitive 
services. As such, in 2019 protection and gender mainstreaming will be at the forefront of the 
response in all sectors with support provided by the Protection Sector. It is known that the needs 
of the most vulnerable people may not be met if humanitarian interventions are not planned 
based on prioritizing gender needs. Women and girls should have the opportunity to voice their 
challenges and concerns and influence decision-making. As such, mainstreaming protection and 
gender sensitive approaches across all sectors is a key priority. 
ANNEX I 
CROSS-CUTTING ISSUES 
This Annex elaborates in detail on how key cross-cutting priorities will be advanced within and between sectors 
in 2019. Protection and gender mainstreaming, environment and eco-system rehabilitation, social cohesion and 
peaceful coexistence, and natural disaster preparedness will be the focus of joined up efforts in 2019. 
ANNEXES

57 
Food Security 
The Food Security Sector will improve physical access to distribution points and limit exposure 
to protection risks. The use of volunteers, porters, water points, availability of breastfeeding 
corners and gender sensitive crowd control have been adopted. Portable skills development, 
and other initiatives to build their capacities, will continue to target the most vulnerable who 
are at risk of marginalization - women, elderly and people with disabilities. The programmes 
include female-headed households and single mothers in both Rohingya and host communities 
as priority beneficiaries. 
Protection principles of safety and dignity, meaningful access, accountability, participation and 
empowerment will form the basis for portable skills development and related programmes. 
Strong monitoring systems have been put in place to document the impact of food assistance, 
advise continuous improvement of processes and inform targeting of the most vulnerable. 
Monitoring will include consideration of protection risks to adopt the most appropriate approach 
and modality (including voucher system) to prevent GBV and other forms of violence. Increased 
access to food will reduce adoption of irreversible protection related coping strategies including 
early and forced marriage and other form of exploitation. 
Complaints and feedback mechanisms have been put in place to address issues with food 
assistance including those that are gender related. Moving forward, the Sector will integrate 
gender and age analysis in project monitoring and reporting. In coordination with the Shelter 
and NFI and Site Management Sectors, the Food Security Sector is promoting alternative 
fuel distribution programmes to mitigate the need for women and children to collect or pay 
for firewood. This important programme greatly reduces the strain on households, particularly 
women, brought on by the consistent hunt for cooking fuel. In addition, it reduces their risk of 
their becoming victims of violence. 
Education 
Newly constructed Education Sector learning facilities will increase accessibility for learners and 
staff with disabilities, and to gender-segregated WASH facilities. While education partners are 
engaging increasing numbers of female facilitators to support learning for refugee children and 
youth, a balanced gender ratio is necessary to ensure learning outreach for boys and girls. 
Education Sector will focus on increasing meaningful female participation and decision-making 
across Community Education Committees and Learning Centre Management Committees. 
A participatory approach to teaching and learning material development for life skills and 
general education will be applied to ensure the content and approach is gender, cultural, and 
conflict sensitive. Teaching and learning materials will strengthen gender equity and protection 
principles, including child and adolescent rights, civic education, and accessibility to critical 
services through child protection and GBV referral systems. Outside of learning facilities, 
sessions will be provided to caregivers to increase knowledge of child rights, parenting and 
gender-sensitivity at the household level. 
Data collection to inform programming implementation will utilize participatory methods tailored 
to children and adolescents (beyond traditional focus group discussions). Child Protection (CP) 
Sub-Sector and Education Sector will conduct joint mapping exercises to highlight risks and 
increase the safety of children by using shared spaces for regular programming and during 
emergencies if needed. 
ANNEXES

58 
Site Management and Site Development (SMSD) 
The SMSD Sector will continue to enhance community participation and empowerment, 
in coordination with the Protection Sector. It will also reinforce two-way communication with 
refugees through the establishment and maintenance of gender-sensitive complaints and 
feedback mechanisms, in coordination with the Protection Sector and CwC working group. 
The Sector will ensure that basic and essential services are in place, according to standards, and 
accessible to all, including vulnerable groups, notably by collecting and providing information 
on needs, gaps and service coverage, through regular assessments conducted in the camps. 
Furthermore, the macro-planning strategy is designed to ensure a greater inclusiveness and 
safety for refugees, and its implementation in 2019 should result in a reinforced protective 
environment. 
Site improvement and site development activities will continue to be designed to help promote 
gender equality and a safe environment for all refugees, while programmes will be designed to 
maximize inclusion. The Sector will observe the differences in problems/issues faced by women, 
girls, boys, and men in more and less densely populated places and advise the appropriate 
sectors for response. The installation and maintenance of solar street lights across all camps will 
also contribute to ensuring safety. 
Health 
The Health Sector is committed to mainstreaming protection and gender into its 2019 
programming, building on linkages with the Protection Sector and important feedback from 
protection monitoring activities. The Health Sector has placed dedicated protection officers in 
the mobile medical teams, to facilitate protection-related referrals in case of any emergency 
(e.g. monsoon or cyclone related), which will continue in 2019. The Protection Sector is drafting 
guidance with the Health Sector on how to mainstream protection in health; and this will be 
rolled out to all health partners. Furthermore, joint field visits are planned to assess the current 
status of protection mainstreaming at health facilities. 
Gender considerations are central to all health interventions; but the sexual and reproductive 
health (SRH) needs for high-risk and special need populations (e.g. sex workers, male and female 
adolescents and young people, and survivors of GBV) are critical and need to be integrated into 
the overall reproductive health care response. Sex and Age Disaggregated Data (SADD) will be 
collected to understand the needs and challenges of adolescent girls and boys. According to 
the minimal initial service package (MISP) calculation based on the ISCG population estimate, 
6,555 women and girls are estimated to be at potential risk of sexual violence in the next 12 
months among those reproductive aged women and girls. The Health Sector works closely with 
the Gender-Based Violence (GBV) Sub-Sector; and will continue to collaborate further in the 
implementation of the Health Sector action plan for GBV. 
Nutrition 
The Nutrition Sector has a strong focus on pregnant and lactating women, adolescent girls and 
children. The partners will ensure that attending nutrition facilities will be safe, and also that 
outreach activities provided by female staff will be carried out in a manner that it will not jeopardize 
their safety. The Nutrition Sector plans to work more closely in 2019 with GBV, Protection and 
other sectors to ensure that women and girls will receive relevant information and messages and 
will be enabled to access nutrition services that they need. 
Surveys to explore the socio-cultural, religious and other factors affecting understanding, but 
also utilization of nutrition services by females, will further help to reduce barriers and improve 
access to important information and services. Existing feedback mechanisms will be made more 
responsive to the limitations faced by Rohingya women and girls (such as their low literacy rates) 
to encourage receipt of feedback on nutrition and other humanitarian services. 
ANNEXES

59 
WASH 
The WASH Sector will continue its coordination with the Protection Sector and the GBV Sub- 
Sector to improve the responsiveness of WASH actors to protection and gender related issues, 
including ensuring facilities are improved and adapted to the cultural and protection needs of 
Rohingya women and girls. Efforts will be made to increase camp level coordination on issues 
surrounding access to and safe use of WASH infrastructures especially for women, girls and 
people with disabilities. Mapping and supporting groups for increasing women’s participation in 
decision making at camp level as well as strengthening of feedback and complaints mechanisms 
will remain integral parts of the response. 
For accountability to affected populations, WASH partners reaffirm their commitment to 
implement the five minimum commitments for safety and dignity developed by the Global WASH 
Cluster. These commitments, centred on people, aim at improving the quality and efficiency of 
the WASH response programmes, and at ensuring that key issues are taken into consideration 
by all partners, such as gender, GBV, CP, disability and age. 
Shelter/NFI 
All Shelter/NFI related activities fall under the overall umbrella of refugee protection. 
Mainstreaming protection and gender is key for effective Shelter/NFI programming. The Shelter/ 
NFI and Protection Sectors will continue to build on the close collaboration initiated in 2018. 
The Shelter/NFI Sector will ensure housing and shelter initiatives specifically link to efforts to 
reduce domestic violence/GBV. Responding to the refugees’ feedback, the Sector will continue 
to ensure that locks are included in new shelter interventions. 
More durable materials will be used for shelter assistance in 2019, providing better overall safety 
and well-being for women, children and men. The Sector will also prioritize rolling out and scaling 
up of LPG interventions, to reduce danger of collecting firewood, and improved solar light home 
systems, to reduce safety concerns in dark areas. 
As a portion of refugees are currently paying rent while residing on private, leased, and even 
public land in Teknaf sub-district, the Shelter/NFI and Protection sectors will provide counselling 
on housing, land, and property (HLP) issues to refugees receiving durable shelter assistance. 
CwC 
Sex and Age Disaggregated Data (SADD) will be collected, used and analysed with support 
from and in coordination with ISCG Secretariat and sectors. Continuous efforts will be made 
to ensure equal and rationalized access to services, participation and engagement in decision 
making. Empowerment of women and girls will be a key consideration in all interventions. CwC 
initiatives will continue to uphold the process of incorporating protection principles and promoting 
meaningful access, safety and dignity in all interventions and strategies. The core protection 
criteria will be maintained: participation; empowerment; do no harm; meaningful access by all 
age, gender, diversity and accountability. 
Providing needs based information on rights and entitlements through multiple channels, 
establishing and upgrading provisions for collecting feedback and complaints and ensuring a 
culture of effective and responsive feedback and complaints mechanisms will be the focus. 
Info hubs, radio, video and audio messages, posters, fliers, leaflets, face-to-face sessions even 
door-to-door outreach activities all contribute to this. Content, materials and messages will 
be developed through a consultative process for ensuring relevance and do no harm. The 
Accountability Sub-Group under CwC working group will continuously put special effort into 
maintaining this. 
ANNEXES

60 
Environment and eco-system rehabilitation 
Protection 
Environmental protection and conservation has a direct impact on human security and protection, 
with a multiplier effect in large human agglomerates like refugee camps. The lands in and 
around the refugee camps are characterized by soil erosion and degradation. This coupled with 
monsoon rains, and climate prone disasters puts refugees’ physical security at risk, especially 
refugees with specific needs. Mitigation and awareness raising activities should therefore be further 
strengthened. Youth, women and other community groups have been engaged in sensitization 
campaigns on sanitation, reforestation, environmental protection and tree plantation in 2018. 
Together with energy and environment partners, and in coordination with other relevant sectors, 
protection actors will, in 2019, continuously sensitize humanitarian staff and refugees on protecting 
the environment in and around the camps. The Protection Sector will also advocate for 
the implementation of sustainable and clean energy programmes that have a direct or indirect 
impact on mitigating the risks of GBV. For example, encouraging the use of LPG and solar lights. 
Across all programming, CP Sub-Sector partners promote environmental sustainability, encouraging 
refugees and staff to participate in environmental efforts in camps and host communities. 
Children and adolescents that are covered by the on-going CP programme, including those 
targeted in this proposed initiative, will participate in camp-wide tree planting drives that are 
generally run on a quarterly basis and in community sanitation activities. CP Sub-Sector partners 
will also plan for an appropriate environmental analysis of the rehabilitation work (for the CP/ 
CFS facilities). This analysis will evaluate the impact of the inputs and outputs of this project and 
whether they will have a significant impact on the well-being of the community economically, 
socially and environmentally. 
Food Security 
The Food Security Sector’s alternative fuel, fuel conservation and environmental protection 
programme, coordinated with the Shelter/NFI and Site Management sectors, will significantly 
contribute to the reduction of deforestation. Activities will include training Rohingya and host 
communities in the production and use of improved cookers, and increasing knowledge on fuel 
conservation practices for food preparation. 
With the technical guidance of the Energy and Environment Technical working group (EETWG), 
hosted under the SMSD, Shelter and Food Security sectors, the Food Security Sector will support 
environmental protection activities such as tree planting and reforestation, soil stabilization, 
water catchment protection and restoration, drainage, solid waste collection and associated 
food/cash for work. 
Reinforcement of distribution sites and access roads through DRR/ Food Assistance for Assets, 
DRR/Food for Work activities, the reinforcement of the kitchens and procurement of additional 
cooking equipment to increase cooking capacity will support DRR. 
ANNEXES

61 
Education 
Environmental awareness and principles will be integrated into life skills and science in sectorapproved 
teaching and learning materials. The emphasis will be on encouraging environmentally 
friendly habits such as waste management and recycling to reduce pollution and deforestation. 
To promote behaviour change in and outside of learning facilities, awareness campaigns and 
activities will target caregivers and teachers through Community Education Committees and 
Learning Centre Management Committees. To increase environmental preservation as well as 
social cohesion, community gardens will be established and maintained as a joint learning facility 
and community activity (including tree-planting which can mitigate the impact of monsoons by 
supporting soil absorption of water). 
SMSD 
With the technical guidance of the EETWG, hosted under the SMSD, Shelter, and Food Security 
sectors, coordinated planting activities and nature conservancy initiatives (including landscape 
restoration) will be implemented to minimize the environmental degradation of the area, in 
line with the Government’s policies and seasonal considerations. In addition to vetiver grass, 
Jarul, Rattan, Kadam, Gamar and Akashmo will be planted under the technical guidance and 
assistance of the EETWG. Bio-engineered land stabilization solutions will be applied in camps in 
coordination between the EETWG and the Site Planning and Site Development working group, 
under the SMSD Sector. 
Conservation efforts will include supporting the 46 elephant response teams established in the 
camps and the construction of new elephant watch towers. There will also be environmental 
education programmes in the schools adjacent to the camps to promote environmental 
awareness. 
Health 
For the Health Sector, the main environmental consideration is ensuring the safe disposal of 
medical waste. Health care waste management is energy intensive, and if managed poorly 
can result in infectious and noncommunicable disease risks as well as environmental impacts. 
Currently, there is no single system for managing medical waste from the camps resulting in 
sub-optimal attempts at disposal such as burying waste or burning waste. A system is urgently 
needed for the safe processing, disposal, diversion and containment of organic materials and 
other health care waste management including sharps and other metals. While ideal solutions 
may not exist given the context, a strategy will be devised and implemented in 2019 to minimize 
the impact of waste and emissions on both human health and the environment. 
WASH 
The WASH Sector will monitor the extraction of ground water and continuously evaluate 
replenishment and recharge capacity as well as intrusion of salt water to minimize any major 
impact on the water table and productive ecosystem. Design and management of fecal sludge 
sites will take into consideration the environmental impact of the processes and final product 
from the sludge treatment. The WASH Sector will integrate mitigation measures against climate 
and environmental constraints in all design of WASH infrastructure. 
ANNEXES

62 
Shelter/NFI 
With the technical guidance of the EETWG, hosted under the SMSD, Shelter and Food Security 
sectors, Shelter/NFI partners will continue to scale up the provision of LPG as an alternative 
fuel to mitigate deforestation. In 2019, the Sector plans to reach the entire refugee caseload 
alongside a substantial host community caseload. 
The Shelter/NFI Sector will initiate a Bamboo Technical Working Group to investigate durability, 
treatment, and livelihood options to ensure environmentally friendly use of bamboo in the 
response. The Shelter/NFI Sector partners have initiated the establishment of bamboo treatment 
plants that will prolong the life span and durability of bamboo utilized for shelters, reducing the 
need to source immature bamboo in future years. 
CwC 
The CwC workig group will maintain and strengthen coordination with other sectors including 
SMSD, Shelter, and the EETWG to mainstream considerations on environment preservation and 
rehabilitation. Messages, content and materials will be developed, reviewed and disseminated. 
ETS/Logistics 
Renewable energy sources such as solar will be used where technically feasible, in order to 
move away from a reliance on fuel for powering telecommunications equipment and logistics 
facilities and to reduce recurring costs. 
Social Cohesion 
Protection 
In order to enhance social cohesion and peaceful coexistence, protection activities which mitigate 
social tensions and benefit both refugees and host communities will be prioritized, primarily 
in the form of facilitated inter-community dialogues and quick impact projects. 
CP partners will be encouraged to participate in an inter-agency training on conflict sensitive 
programming, including the analysis of connectors and dividers throughout the programme cycle. 
The training will be led by a local NGO with expertise on the issue and experience in the 
local context. Existing programming will therefore be strengthened and scaled up through the 
delivery of modules on peaceful coexistence and peacebuilding to adolescent and youth clubs, 
and, increased access to shared protection services in host community areas surrounding refugee 
camps. Recreational activities between refugee and host communities will also be initiated. 
Tensions related to equitable access to services will be mitigated through clear messages delivered 
to communities directly and through government counterparts, on humanitarian funded 
service provision, in particular on support provided to strengthen the overall CP systems and 
alignment of key services, such as case management and alternative family-based care in both 
refugee and host communities. 
As Bangladeshi women and girls also face heightened risks of GBV, GBV services will be expanded 
to the host community. Women friendly services will be provided in the host communities 
and joint initiatives and encounters among women groups will be supported to foster 
peaceful coexistence and cohesion. 
ANNEXES

63 
Food Security 
Livelihood support will be extended to host communities, with extensive reforestation activities 
that will have a positive and direct impact in mitigating tensions and conflict prevention between 
Rohingya refugees and the local population. 
Education 
Social cohesion will be forged through extra-curricular participation targeting both inter- and 
intra-social relations in host and refugee communities. With limited recreational space in the 
camps, learning facilities, will serve as platforms for festivals and celebrations during after school 
hours to preserve Rohingya cultural identity and heritage. 
Since the beginning of the response, co-teaching in learning facilities by host community and 
refugee educators has introduced cross-cultural dialogue and comradery between the two 
groups. 
Similarly, participation of host community teachers alongside refugee instructors and parents in 
CECs and LCMCs has strengthened these interactions. 
Inter-community relations may be further enhanced by having host community teachers act as 
ambassadors for peaceful coexistence in their communities, initiating recreational activities that 
bring refugee and host community children and youth together in the camps outside of learning 
time (such as through sports tournaments, dance lessons or competitions). 
SMSD 
When engaging with the refugee population in the daily coordination of activities in the camps, 
partners will encourage peaceful coexistence within camps and with host communities, through 
the promotion of peaceful coexistence, including through the process of establishing elected 
community representation. 
Partners will also be engaging in minimizing the impact of the camps on neighboring communities 
through the maintenance of infrastructure and risk mitigation activities in host communities, and 
joint programming enabling the participation of host communities in cash-for-work programmes 
alongside refugees. The possibility of developing formal forums in which the host community and 
refugees will regularly meet to dialogue will also be explored, in coordination with the Protection 
Sector. 
Health 
Peaceful coexistence implies a state of mutual respect between the Rohingya refugees and host 
community population as well as within the Rohingya population. Strong social cohesion is an 
important component of well-being, with implications for mental and/or psychosocial support. In 
view of this, the Health Sector is committed to attaining cohesiveness through ensuring universal 
health coverage among both Rohingya and host community. Ensuring equity in access to quality 
health services is an important mitigation of social tension, and as such, the Health Sector standards 
for health among the Rohingya are aligned with the Government standards for host community. 
In addition, the Health Sector will continue to invest in the District health complex in 2019. 
ANNEXES

64 
WASH 
Under the specific focus of ensuring mutual respect, trust and equity between host and Rohingya 
communities, the WASH Sector will continue to respond through a do no harm lens with 
consideration for sustainable and equitable assistance. Significant resources will be dedicated 
to ensuring host communities benefit from WASH interventions. 
Both piped water networks and waste management facilities will benefit both refugees and 
surrounding host communities. The design of water networks consider host community locations, 
while any sewerage treatment plant or solid waste landfill will benefit both host community and 
refugee populations. 
Shelter/NFI 
Through the Bamboo Technical Working Group, the Sector intends to establish and optimize 
bamboo treatment operations and share the knowledge with host community members living 
nearby the camps, as well as bamboo cultivators away from the camps. The knowledge sharing 
should also initiate livelihood opportunities for host communities. The activities carried out by the 
Sector’s partners will pave the way for development actors to initiate longer term programming, 
possibly with the private sector. 
CwC 
Ensuring peaceful coexistence is a continuous process to which the CwC working group will 
continue to contribute by maintaining sensitivity in messaging and balancing service provision 
for both refugees and host communities. CwC actors will work hand in hand with SMSD and 
Protection Sectors, GiHA WG and with the Government to reach and support the host community. 
Natural Disaster Preparedness and Contingency 
Protection 
Nearly all refugees will continue to be at high risk of the impact of cyclones in 2019, without 
a viable and practical physical protection solution consisting in the evacuation of the entire 
refugee population to safety. In case of cyclone, heightened vulnerabilities and risks are 
expected, namely loss of lives and increased psychosocial needs, loss of documentation, family 
separation, weakening of community protection mechanisms, inaccessibility of protection service 
points, risks of GBV, risks of trafficking, spontaneous or organized relocations into community or 
emergency spaces/shelters, etc.; all with potential increased protection risks for women, girls, 
older persons and persons with disabilities in particular. 
In a natural disaster-prone area and with the current set-up, the strategy seeks to pragmatically 
integrate DRR and emergency preparedness response into regular programming, and to 
reinforce preparedness before high risk period. Strengthening awareness raising on risks linked 
to natural disaster and mitigating measures, DRR and emergency preparedness through a 
community-based approach, are essential and unique ways to prevent harm and loss of lives. 
ANNEXES

65 
In preparation for emergencies, jointly with the CwC working group and SMSD Sector, protection 
partners will focus on dissemination of harmonized messaging to: 1) raise awareness on means 
to reduce risks; 2) inform on service points and on the importance for the community to protect 
and help the most vulnerable households and individuals; and 3) mitigate protection risks and 
reduce rumors (family separation, trafficking). Regarding GBV preparation, Protection Emergency 
Response Unit (PERU) composes of protection members including GBV Sub-Sector members 
who provide training for frontline people during an emergency. The frontline team provides 
psychological first aid, referral to emergency, case management services and outreach to the 
community (women, men, boys and girls) in order to improve information and access of vulnerable 
communities to emergency services and protection messages. 
In terms of CP preparedness specifically, risk assessment and mapping of CP facilities at risk will 
continue to identify strategies to prevent family separation during disasters and pre-identify the 
temporary/emergency care meeting points in the camps and strengthen/rehabilitate the existing 
CP facilities including CFS/adolescents’ space to cater for cyclones. Cohorts of CP volunteers 
will also be trained to provide support to vulnerable families in need of relocation, should a 
cyclone result in massive population movements. Community-based CP groups will be trained 
on how to monitor CP risks and develop community-led disaster response plans, how to support 
in identification of children separated from families during disasters. 
Food Security 
The Sector will ensure proportionate, appropriate and timely food security responses. The Sector 
will reinforce, enable and maintain the current food assistance through general food distribution 
(GFD) and e-voucher, and in parallel prepare the response in case of emergency and according 
to the event, to cover the most vulnerable or those temporarily unable to cook their food or cut 
off from distributions sites. Stockpiling of ready to eat food in strategic positions within the camps 
will be in place in case of people being isolated. 
Stocks of dry food will be placed in the Madhur Chara Logistics Hub in case of interruption of 
the road between Cox’s Bazar and the camps. Another central aspect of the response will be 
the use of a “helper system” (already in use at distribution points) as support for most vulnerable 
people, and for cooked meals distribution to the most in need and the mobilization of volunteers 
that can support the deliveries of food in case of major access issue in two ways: a) bringing food 
to the distribution points; b) bringing food to the most vulnerable/isolated/internally displaced. 
Approximately 4,000 helpers per month may be mobilized according to the needs and access 
issues. 
ANNEXES

66 
Education 
The Education Sector will pre-position education supplies (including learning supplies and 
emergency kits) and allow for repairs for 12% of learning facilities (approximately 580 learning 
facilities) that are the most disaster prone across the camps. In preparation for a cyclone or flood, 
education staff, including teachers and sector camp focal points, will participate in simulations, 
DRR training and awareness of Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs), and community key 
messages. The mapping of learning facilities in high-risk locations will be updated prior to 
monsoon and cyclone seasons to ensure the temporary or permanent closure of learning facilities 
that pose a safety risk for children. Alternative and mobile learning approaches, such as space 
sharing with CFS or home-based learning will be encouraged in the event of an emergency, if 
safety permits. 
New learning facility designs are under development in collaboration with the Government, 
including hazard-resilient models that can potentially be used as multifunctional spaces including 
as cyclone shelters. With the current absence of cyclone shelters for refugees, construction of 
these buildings will be a major step forward for cyclone preparedness. 
SMSD 
The Sector will coordinate preparedness and contingency efforts at camp level through SMSD 
Sector agencies in support of the CiC, notably through the engagement of the Bangladesh 
Cyclone Preparedness Programme (CPP) volunteers and continuous support to respond to 
capacity building needs, with a last group of CPP volunteers to be appointed and trained in 
January and February 2019. 
Additional support to the maintenance of early warning systems in case of cyclone, communication 
with communities about the risks jointly with the CwC working group and Protection Sector, and 
contingency plans will continue to be developed. 
Health 
For the Health Sector, contingency planning for disasters encompasses preparedness for 
weather related emergencies, as well as large scale disease outbreaks among the Rohingya 
and/or host community. To address this, the Health Sector must ensure availability of mobile 
medical teams and other surge mechanisms to sustain essential health services (including 
isolation for infectious diseases) in the event of facility disruptions from weather related events; 
ensure systems and resources are in place for emergency referrals in case of a mass casualty 
event, including contingency for emergency telecommunications; ensure functional SOPs exists 
for outbreak response including management of infectious dead bodies in the event of a largescale 
infectious disease outbreak; and procure, store and distribute life-saving and essential 
medicines and supplies (including pre-positioning supplies such as emergency kits and outbreak 
investigation materials). 
The Health Sector must ensure emergency lifesaving SRH services by contingency planning for 
MISP, pre-positioning of commodities such as clean delivery kits, and identifying Basic Emergency 
Obstetric Care (EmOC) facilities and referral pathways. 
ANNEXES

67 
Nutrition 
The Nutrition Sector has developed a strong Emergency Preparedness and Response Plan (EPRP) 
covering floods, storms and cyclones, identifying clear triggers for sector partners to initiate 
response activities, based on specific impacts. During the monsoon season of 2018, which saw 
only localized impacts, the activities proved to be effective and sufficient to ensure continuity of 
nutrition services or enabling partners to re-establish them within 72 hours or less. The approach 
includes the provision of services through mobile nutrition teams, if facilities are damaged or not 
accessible; the provision of extended rations to caretakers in case that nutrition services might 
be inaccessible for a number of days; ensuring that supplies and commodities are stored in the 
facilities or storage points close to the camps to address disruptions of transportation and the 
closure of all facilities 24-72 hours prior to landfall of cyclones, including the transfer of inpatients 
in stabilisation centres to cyclone-resistant health facilities. 
WASH 
The WASH Sector will continue to improve capacity to respond effectively and be better prepared 
for future shocks including simulation exercises and the prepositioning of contingency stocks. In 
the event of any emergency the WASH Sector will mobilize a response based on the strategic 
guidance of the national disaster management institutional framework and agreed concept for 
the camps. 
In the event of an AWD outbreak, WASH responses will be intensified by all partners in line with 
the joint WASH and Health AWD preparedness and response plan. 
Shelter NFI 
The Sector will continue to preposition emergency Shelter/NFI kits for at least half of the target 
population. Contingency stock is mapped down to the level of warehouses and containers in 
the camps, and updated monthly. The Sector’s emergency focal points at sub-district and camplevels 
have been selected. Appointed Sector emergency focal points are trained to respond to 
emergency incidents and will receive refresher sessions prior to cyclone and monsoon seasons. 
The Sector has also collaborated with the Education Sector to design learning centres-cumcyclone 
shelters, which could offer protection for refugees during cyclone events once 
implemented in sufficient quantity. 
CwC 
In addition to the continuous work to strengthen access to multi-platform early warnings and 
disseminating disaster preparedness information, the CwC partners will, in the lead-up to a 
cyclone, support existing partners in accelerating the delivery of multi-platform early warnings to 
communities, track rumors, and relay community concerns to decision-makers. In the immediate 
aftermath of a severe disaster, CwC partners will assess damage to CwC facilities and disruptions 
of activities, and identify and implement interim solutions for information sharing and feedback 
reporting until conditions allow re-establishment of regular activities. 
ANNEXES

68 
ETS / Logistics 
The Logistics Sector, in preparation for a severe cyclone event, will prepare and maintain a 
reliable information management system to facilitate the rapid update of road conditions and 
operational gaps; consolidate infrastructure assessments to facilitate a prioritization system of 
clearance and access in case of logistics constraints; maintain standby storage capacity in case 
of a rapid increase of storage demand or disruption on the existing system; and preposition 
an additional 20” General Purpose Containers inside and around the Camps for weatherproof 
storage. The Sector will additionally ensure risk mitigation measures – including capacity building 
- at warehouses to ensure safe storage in severe event conditions. 
In case of urgency, the Emergency Telecommunications Sector will assess, repair and maintain 
the connectivity and communications of humanitarians in the operational areas. The Sector will 
procure and preposition equipment to be in place before the event occurs. 
ANNEXES Host Community Engagement – building on achievements 
in 2018 
Host community support under the Joint Response Plan is aimed at promoting social cohesion by reducing 
impact on the environment as well as improving access to quality services and skills development for 
the most affected populations. Important elements of the host community support planned for 2019 include 
strengthening livelihoods and education opportunities and mitigating environmental degradation. 
Key host community accomplishments under the 2018 JRP 
Environment and eco-system rehabilitation – Deforestation is a major concern. JRP partners are working 
together to mitigate deforestation by scaling up planting activities. In 2018, some 340,174 tree saplings were 
planted in camps and the most affected surrounding communities. In addition, a coalition of organizations is 
increasing the distribution of LPG cooking sets and cylinders with a plan to cover 240,000 households in the 
refugee and host community. 
Education – 59,913 students (100 primary schools and 14 secondary schools) were supported through grants 
to improve the quality of learning materials and to support retention of students. A total of 2,469 teachers 
were trained. 
Health – 27 Government health facilities, including community clinics, union-level facilities and hospitals 
were assisted to cope with the increased patient volumes. In particular, the Sadar District Hospital benefitted 
from human resources support (nurses, medical officers and medical specialists) as well as various types of 
supplies and equipment. 
WASH - 144,250 individuals benefitted from 449 new deep wells and hand pumps and from 144 rehabilitated 
deep wells and hand pumps. 130 blocks of latrines and 325 hand washing facilities were constructed. 
The Bangladeshi’s Department of Public Health and Engineering (DPHE) Water Laboratory was upgraded to 
better serve the affected host communities. Non-Food Items such as jerry cans, and other materials were 
also distributed. 
Shelter/NFI – 2,230 households received LPG Starter Kits with kitchen stoves and relevant training. 13,000 
households also benefitted from Shelter/NFI support and tarpaulins, blankets, solar lamps were distributed 
during monsoon season. 
Food Security – 64,000 households (320,000 individuals) received some form of livelihood support, 
including capacity building in improved agricultural practices and home gardening and vocational skills for 
income generation. 70,000 landless farmers also received food production assistance. 
Site Management/Site Development – 65,000 individuals benefitted from Cash for Work initiatives in 
construction works, disaster risk mitigation activities, including the 10-kilometer canal dredging works by 
SMEP. Other capacity building initiatives targeted local disaster management actors to develop their capacity 
in mitigating disaster risks.

69 
Photo Credit: ISCG / Rui Padilha / 2018 
ANNEXES 
Protection/GBV/Child Protection – 62,113 individuals benefitted from 40 quick impact projects on GBV 
prevention and response. 186 government officials participated in training on protection principles. 10 community-
based committees were established to promote safer environment for children and 4,000 adolescents 
from 90 youth clubs benefitted from life-skills programmes, awareness raising on child protection and 
GBV prevention, reporting and referral of cases. 
Host Community support in the 2019 Joint Response Plan 
The majority of the above-mentioned activities will continue in 2019 with a greater focus on promoting social 
cohesion/peaceful coexistence, localization, and participation by both refugees and host communities. 
The results of the ongoing Multi-Sectoral Needs Assessment (MSNA) will facilitate tailor-made programmes to 
respond to the prioritized needs of the affected host communities. 
Further emphasis will be made to support environmental rehabilitation, including through scaling up distribution 
of LPG Starter Kits as well as extensive reforestation activities in coordination with the Government of 
Bangladesh. 
Host communities will also increasingly benefit from the development of voucher-based mechanisms to assist 
the refugee population, resulting in significant levels of procurement of diverse agricultural products in the 
local market. 
In 2019, the World Bank (WB) and the Asian Development Bank (ADB) support to the Government of Bangladesh 
will strengthen provision of basic services through infrastructure works such as the rehabilitation of 
roads and cyclone shelters, health and education support to address longer-term needs in host communities 
surrounding the camps. The 2019 Joint Response Plan activities will aim to complement these significant 
contributions. 

70 
ANNEX II 
ROHINGYA JRP MONITORING FRAMEWORK 2019 
A comprehensive monitoring framework for the JRP 2019 has been developed with support from the Needs and 
Population Monitoring (NPM) and Assessment Capacities Project (ACAPS) to track the implementation of the JRP 
2019. The monitoring framework aims to demonstrate the impact of the Response in 2019 by constantly generating 
evidence of reach, progress in delivery, and quality of services. The framework aims at demonstrating change, and 
detailing how progress towards targets will be measured. 
In order to clearly track progress against the Strategic Objectives, which requires strong inter-sector analysis, 
outcome statements have been defined against each of the Strategic Objectives, and sector-level indicators have 
been aligned against them. The Strategic Objectives and outcome statements are captured below. The objectives of 
the monitoring framework are: 
• To ensure timely collection, analyses and dissemination of data on key indicators; 
• To ensure that gaps are noted early in order to inform ongoing advocacy and operational decision making; 
• To ensure that quality information on response progress is presented to stakeholders including the Government of 
Bangladesh, donors, and operational agencies; 
• To strengthen inter-sector analysis. 
Sectors will be responsible for tracking progress against their indicators. Progress against indicators will be 
consolidated by the ISCG Secretariat with the Information Management Working Group (IMWG), and analysed in 
collaboration with the Sector Coordinators and HoSOs. 
The Plan will be reviewed at mid-term, with dashboards produced quarterly. Data for most indicators will be 
consolidated every month through 4Ws. In June 2019, a full mid-term review of the JRP 2019 will be undertaken to make 
the revisions and adjustments necessary based on the evolution of the situation on the ground. At the end of March 
and the end of September, a dashboard reporting on progress against the Plan, including Strategic Objectives and key 
sector indicators will be produced. 
The Needs Assessment Working Group (NAWG) will coordinate periodic multi-sector assessments in the refugee 
and host communities to identify needs and gaps. The first multi-sector needs assessment covering all Unions of 
Teknaf and Ukhiya, in order to underpin better targeting and coordination of host community response, was completed 
at the end of 2018. Multi-sector needs assessments will be coordinated by the ISCG Secretariat as Chair of the NAWG, 
with support from REACH, IOM-NPM and UNHCR. Combined with the more in-depth technical sector assessments (such 
as nutrition SMART surveys and Food Security REVA), and the enhanced context analysis to be undertaken by UNDP, 
results will be consolidated by the ISCG Secretariat and analysed to monitor the status of the targeted populations, the 
impact and outcomes of the response overall in order to inform strategic and operational decision-making. 
Under the Strategic Objectives are 7 Outcome Statements: 
1. Refugee and host 
community women, men, 
girls, and boys benefit from 
direct protection services, 
and from services that 
mainstream protection and 
gender considerations 
2. Targeted individuals and 
communities participate in 
decision making, are 
supported to be 
empowered, and to enjoy 
their fundamental rights 
4. The quality of services 
delivered across the 
response is improved and 
rationalized to ensure equal 
access to all targeted 
populations and improved 
living conditions 
5. Response actors take 
measures to reduce disaster 
risks facing targeted 
populations, and to prepare 
for natural disasters 
3. Life-saving assistance is 
provided to a­ected 
communities in a timely and 
e.cient manner 
6. In coordination with the 
GoB, humanitarian and 
development partners, 
equitable access to 
resources and services is 
ensured for all targeted 
populations 
7. Response is stabilized 
and sustainability is 
supported by building the 
capacity of national actors, 
as well as targeted 
populations 
JOINT RESPONSE PLAN 2019 
SO1. Collectively deliver 
protection to refugee 
women, men, girls and boys 
SO3. Foster social 
cohesion 
SO2. Provide life-saving 
assistance to a.ected 
populations 
ANNEXES

71 
ANNEXES 
An electronic version of this table is also available on www.humanitarianresponse.info 
1. Refugee and host community 
women, men, girls, and boys 
benefit from direct protection 
services, and from services that 
mainstream protection and 
gender considerations 
1.1. Rohingya women, men, 
girls and boys are registered, 
documented and continue to 
be protected from 
refoulment 
1.2. Rohingya women, men, 
girls and boys feel safe in 
their homes and immediate 
environments 
1.3. Rohingya women, men, 
girls and boys have access to 
case management, referral 
services and legal aid 
1.4. Rohingya refugee 
children and adolescents 
affected by violence, 
exploitation and abuse have 
improved access to a range of 
protection services 
1.5. Rohingya women, men, 
girls and boys belonging to 
vulnerable groups are 
identified and provided with 
targeted support, and barriers 
to their access to services are 
removed 
1.6. Prevention of crime and 
violence in Rohingya refugee 
settlements, including genderbased 
violence, is improved 
1.7. Protection and gender 
considerations are 
mainstreamed in the response 
1.8. Female and male 
community leaders are 
identified and participate in 
promotion of gender equality 
2. Targeted individuals and 
communities participate in 
decision making, are supported 
to be empowered, and to enjoy 
their fundamental rights 
2.1. Rohingya women, men, 
girls and boys are effectively 
consulted, engaged and 
participate in decision making 
2.2. Feedback and complaints 
mechanisms are established 
and maintained 
2.3. Affected populations have 
sufficient and accurate 
information and knowledge 
about their rights to make 
informed decisions about 
their lives and participate 
meaningfully in the 
response 
2.4. Rohingya women, men, 
girls and boys in vulnerable 
settlements are relocated 
with their consent and 
participation 
3. Life-saving assistance is 
provided to affected communities 
in a timely and efficient manner 
3.1. Rohingya and host 
community women, men, girls 
and boys have adequate and 
equitable access to safe water 
3.2. Rohingya and host 
community women, men, girls 
and boys have adequate and 
equitable access to safe 
sanitation 
3.3. Hygiene and waste 
management are promoted 
and supported in Rohingya 
refugee and host community 
settlements 
3.4. Rohingya women, men, 
girls and boys have access to 
timely, life-saving food 
assistance 
3.5. Health risks and 
communicable diseases are 
monitored and prevented in 
Rohingya refugee and host 
community settlements 
3.6. Children under 5, 
Pregnant and Lactating 
Women, and other 
vulnerable groups receive 
treatment for SAM and MAM 
3.7. Rohingya women, men, 
girls and boys benefit from 
lifesaving shelter assistance 
4. The quality of services 
delivered across the response is 
improved and rationalized to 
ensure equal access to all 
targeted populations and 
improved living conditions 
4.1. Rohingya women, men, 
girls and boys benefit from 
access to improved water, 
sanitation and hygiene 
4.2. Affected Rohingya 
women, men, girls and boys 
have adequate access to 
psychosocial support services 
4.3. Rohingya women, men, 
girls and boys have upgraded 
and improved living conditions 
4.4. Rohingya and host 
community women, men, girls 
and boys have improved 
dietary diversity, and reduced 
reliance on harmful coping 
strategies 
4.5. Rohingya and host 
community women, men, girls 
and boys have adequate and 
equitable access to quality 
primary and secondary 
healthcare 
4.6. Children have improved 
access to quality teaching and 
learning, aligned with 
education standards 
4.7. Children under 5, PLW, 
and other vulnerable groups 
have access to quality 
nutrition services 
4.8. Integrated site planning 
mechanisms, including plot 
allocation and land use 
planning are established and 
implemented, and 
congestion is reduced 
5. Response actors take 
measures to reduce disaster risks 
facing targeted populations, and 
to prepare for natural disasters 
5.1 Humanitarian actors and 
coordination structures are 
prepared for natural and 
manmade hazards and 
mitigate their impacts 
5.2 Humanitarian actors and 
coordination structures 
respond to natural and 
manmade hazard through lifesaving 
interventions 
6. In coordination with the GoB, 
humanitarian and development 
partners, equitable access to 
resources and services is ensured 
for all targeted populations 
6.1. Local humanitarian 
capacities are strengthened to 
enable sustainable service 
delivery 
6.2. Effective response-wide 
programme monitoring and 
evaluation is conducted to 
ensure appropriateness, 
timeliness, relevance and 
effectiveness of humanitarian 
interventions 
6.3. Humanitarian response is 
strengthened through 
effective inter-sectoral 
coordination and advocacy 
6.4. Information management 
capacity and data quality is 
improved through information 
sharing, data harmonization 
and joint analysis 
6.5. Humanitarian assistance 
is aligned with and supports 
Government led programmes 
and systems 
6.6. Operational support 
capacities, including 
sustainable logistics and 
infrastructure systems, are 
monitored, maintained and 
augmented to ensure 
continuity and efficiency in 
service delivery. 
6.7. Camp governance 
systems are expanded to 
ensure a sustainable, 
community-based site 
management structure 
7. Response is stabilized and 
sustainability is supported by 
building the capacity of national 
actors, as well as targeted 
populations 
7.1. The environmental 
impacts of the influx are 
identified and mitigated 
through structural and ecosystem-
based mitigation 
measures 
7.2. Tensions between 
Rohingya refugee and host 
community populations, 
and within refugee 
populations, are proactively 
identified and effectively 
mitigated 
7.3. An environment of 
mutual respect and trust 
between Rohingya refugee 
and host communities is 
fostered through dialogue and 
joint-interventions 
7.4. Rohingya refugees 
benefit from portable 
skills development 
opportunities and host 
communities have improved 
access to capital and income 
generating opportunities 
7.5. Portable skills 
development interventions are 
expanded and diversified to 
ensure the inclusion of 
women and girls 

72 
SECTOR MONITORING INDICATORS 
PROTECTION 
SECTOR OBJECTIVE 1 : Monitor and advocate for access to territory, prevention of refoulement and respect for 
refugees’ rights, whilst enhancing continuous registration and documentation for all refugee women, men, girls 
and boys 
Related to Strategic Objective 1 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET DATA SOURCE ORGANIZATION 
FREQUENCY 
# of situational protection reports 
produced by the Protection Working 
Group (PWG), based on protection 
monitoring, Focus Group Discussions 
(FGD) and camp protection profiles 
findings of border monitoring briefs 
produced 
0.92M 0 3 
situational 
protection 
reports 
12 border 
monitoring 
briefs 
PWG coordination 
team, UNHCR, 
partners’ protection 
monitoring reports 
PWG Coordination 
team with inputs from 
UNHCR 
PWG coordination 
team 
Quarterly 
for protection 
monitoring 
Monthly 
for border 
monitoring 
brief 
# of advocacy interventions for the promotion 
and protection of refugee rights 
0.92M 70 70 PWG, Sector 
5W, specific 
communications 
documented in 
writing 
Sector/SS 
Coordinators, 
PWG 
partners 
Monthly 
# of cases supported with legal aid and 
related services including victims of trafficking, 
and exploitation by age and sex 
0.92M 2319 2,000 PWG, 5W PWG partners 
Monthly 
% of persons of concern for whom data 
disaggregated by sex, age, location and 
specific needs is available and updated 
0.92M 100% 100% RRRC/UNHCR family 
counting/Joint 
Verification 
UNHCR Monthly 
% of persons of concern provided with 
individual documentation based on 
comprehensive and unified database 
disaggregated by age and sex 
0.92M 100% 100% RRRC/UNHCR Family 
Counting/Joint 
Verification 
UNHCR Monthly 
SECTOR OBJECTIVE 2 : Promote a community-based approach to the response and provide services to persons 
at heightened protection risk, including girls, boys, women and men of all ages and with diverse needs and 
vulnerabilities 
Related to Strategic Objective 1 & 2 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET DATA SOURCE ORGANIZATION 
FREQUENCY 
# of people reached by community-led 
messaging on key protection risks 
0.92M 550,000 600,000 5Ws PWG Bi-weekly 
# of community-led initiatives supported 
by humanitarian actors 
0.92M N/A 60 5Ws PWG/CPSS Quarterly 
# of adolescent and youth development 
hubs established and supported who 
lead on participatory assessment, design 
and monitoring 
0.92M 50 50 5Ws CPSS Bi-weekly 
# of people at heightened risk identified 
and supported through protection case 
management mechanism (not including 
CP and GBV) 
0.92M 9,5312 80,000 4Ws Protection 
partners, 
PWG 
Bi-weekly 
ANNEXES 

73 
SECTOR OBJECTIVE 3 : Support system strengthening, by supporting Government and local partners, promoting 
peaceful coexistence and enhancing social cohesion within and between refugee and host communities 
Related to Strategic Objective 1 & 3 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET DATA SOURCE ORGANIZATION 
FREQUENCY 
# of other sectoral service providers 
trained on protection principles, including 
GBV response, child protection, 
PSEA and CoC, by sex 
N/A 2,400 3,200 4Ws PWG Biweekly 
# of dedicated protection staff trained 
on enhanced technical protection skills 
N/A 5,200 5,500 4Ws PWG Biweekly 
# of initiatives with government officials 
that build capacity, to protect and deliver 
quality services 
N/A N/A 60 4Ws PWG Biweekly 
# of joint initiatives that foster social 
cohesion between refugees and host 
community (see page 63 for details) 
1.3M 40 50 4Ws PWG Biweekly 
SECTOR OBJECTIVE 4 : Improve access to quality survivor-centred services by responding to individual needs, 
preventing and mitigating of GBV risks, and empowering women, girls and survivors of GBV 
Related to Strategic Objective 1 & 2 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET DATA SOURCE ORGANIZATION 
FREQUENCY 
# of persons benefitting from 
awareness activities that include 
general info on GBV, locations for 
services and the benefits of service 
for survivors (by age, sex, diversity) 
610,117 101,560 243,744 5W template GBV SS 
partners 
Every 2 
weeks 
# of individuals benefitting from 
structured PSS services that meet 
minimum standards (by age, sex, 
diversity) 
610,117 111,907 390,000 5W template GBV SS 
partners 
Every 2 
weeks 
# of women and girls benefiting 
from structured skills and empowerment 
programming (by age) 
541,217 N/A 81,182 5W template GBV SS 
partners 
Every 2 
weeks 
# of service providers and other humanitarian 
actors trained (GBV minimum 
standards, GBV mainstreaming, 
case management, GBVIMS, 
CMR, GBV IASC Guidelines, etc.) 
N/A 3,191 7,658 5W template GBV SS 
partners 
Every 2 
weeks 
# of individuals successfully referred 
to Safe Spaces for services 
within 48H (by identity, age, sex) 
610,117 N/A N/A 5W template GBV SS 
partners 
Every 2 
weeks 
% of survivors supported with needed 
services (including PSS, health, 
legal, empowerment programmes, 
etc.) 
610,117 N/A N/A GBVIMS + GBV SS 
monthly data collection 
template 
GBVIMG 
DGOs + additional 
GBV 
SS partners 
Monthly 
SECTOR OBJECTIVE 5 : Provide specialized child protection services to children most at risk, including adolescents 
most at risk 
Related to Strategic Objective 1 & 2 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET DATA SOURCE ORGANIZATION 
FREQUENCY 
# of children, including adolescents, 
identified in need who are 
are receiving structured PSS services 
Refugee children 
284,119 
Host community 
107,162 
114,387 
in 430 
CFSs/adolescent 
spaces 
Refugee 
children 
284,119 
Host community 
107,162 
Activity report, Sector 
5W 
CPSS 
Partners 
Monthly 
ANNEXES 

74 
# of identified children at risk who 
received individual case management 
services to meet his/her 
unique needs 
24,870 11,403 24,870 Case management 
database/CM records 
+ CPIMS 
CPSS partners 
Monthly 
# of children in alternative care who 
are receiving regular follow services 
6,000 1,263 6,000 Case management 
database CPIMS 
CPSS 
Partners 
Monthly 
# of adolescents and youth receiving 
services, including portable 
skills development activities (10 - 14 
& 15 - 18) 
For portable 
skills development 
74,900 
VT – 3,000 
36,286 74,900 Activity report CPSS Partners 
Monthly 
SECTOR OBJECTIVE 6 : Promote an integrated multi-sectoral approach to protection 
Related to Strategic Objective 1 & 2 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET DATA SOURCE ORGANIZATION 
FREQUENCY 
# of sector specific protection mainstreaming 
assessments conducted 
N/A N/A 6 One-to-one 
meetings between 
coordinators 
Qualitative reports 
will illustrate 
examples from each 
sector 
Sector Coordinators 
Quarterly 
% of other sector members whose 
staff have been trained in protection 
mainstreaming capacity building 
(50%) 
N/A N/A 50% Individual meetings 
with Sector 
Coordinators 
PWG Quarterly 
# of sectors whose work plan/ 
strategy includes the development 
of programming tools which mainstream 
protection 
N/A N/A 9 One-to-one 
communications and 
meetings between 
coordinators 
Qualitative reports 
will illustrate 
examples from each 
sector 
PWG, Sector 
Coordinators 
Quarterly 
FOOD SECURITY 
SECTOR OBJECTIVE 1 : Ensure and sustain timely provision of life-saving food assistance for Rohingya refugees 
Related to Strategic Objective 1 & 2 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET DATA SOURCE ORGANIZATION FREQUENCY 
# of refugees receiving regular 
and emergency food assistance 
through in-kind or e-voucher disaggregated 
by age and sex 
906,512 1 5 Stakeholder 
feedback 
WFP Quarterly 
% of people accessing at least 
three items of fresh food through 
voucher 
100% 
(906,512 
refugees) 
N/A 60% Voucher 
redemption 
records 
Implementing 
Partners 
Monthly 
% of targeted people with acceptable 
Food Consumption Score 
(FCS) 
100% 
(1,242,442) 
67% 85% End line surveys 
Refugee 
Vulnerability 
Assessments 
Partners 
Food Security 
Sector 
Midterm and 
end year 
# of meetings held by/with camp 
FSS focal point 
12 N/A 12 (at least 
one per 
month) 
Meeting 
records/Minutes 
Food Security 
Sector 
Monthly 
ANNEXES 

75 
SECTOR OBJECTIVE 2 : Promote portable skills development opportunities for Rohingya and enhance the livelihoods 
and resilience of host communities 
Related to Strategic Objective 1 & 2 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET DATA SOURCE ORGANIZATION 
FREQUENCY 
# of host community households 
receiving livelihoods support disaggregated 
by sex and age 
67,200 N/A 67,200 Beneficiary records Implementing 
Partners 
End of 
year 
% of people receiving portable 
skills development packages disaggregated 
by sex 
207,000 N/A 80,000 Beneficiary records Implementing 
Partners 
End of 
year 
% of households not applying extreme 
coping strategy disaggregated 
by sex 
100% N/A 50% End line surveys 
Refugee Vulnerability 
Assessments 
Partners Mid-term 
and end 
year 
SECTOR OBJECTIVE 3 : Address and mitigate environmental impact caused by Rohingya refugees’ influx and 
support social cohesion through enhancement and restoration of natural resources 
Related to Strategic Objective 1 & 3 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET DATA SOURCE ORGANIZATION FREQUENCY 
# of hectares covered/rehabilitated 
through environmental restoration 
activities 
335,930 N/A 150% 
100 acres 
Field 
observations, 
geographical 
surveys/ 
measurements 
Implementing 
Partners 
End of year 
% of targeted host community population 
participating in environmental 
awareness and planning activities 
100% 
336,000 
N/A 80% Project 
monitoring 
reports 
Implementing 
Partners 
Monthly and 
end of year 
report 
# of sites rehabilitation initiatives 
undertaken, including reforestation, 
land stabilization and watersheds 
rehabilitation 
336,000 N/A 200 Field 
observations, 
project reports 
Implementing 
Partners 
End of year 
EDUCATION 
SECTOR OBJECTIVE 1 : Expand and strengthen immediate access to equitable learning opportunities, in a safe 
and protective environment, for crisis-affected refugee and host community children and youth (3-24 years) 
Related to Strategic Objective 1 & 2 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET DATA SOURCE ORGANIZATION FREQUENCY 
# of children and youth benefiting 
from access to learner-friendly environments, 
including life skills and 
resilience programmes in refugee 
and host communities (disaggregated 
by age, gender) 
696,400 242,448 462,460 5W All active 
partners 
Fortnightly 
# of safe and equipped learning 
facilities with gender segregated 
WASH facilities in refugee camps 
4,827 2,404 2,423 5W All active 
partners 
Fortnightly 
# of schools benefitting from 
school/latrine rehabilitation (host 
community) 
230 N/A 230 5W All active 
partners 
Fortnightly 
ANNEXES 

76 
ANNEXES 
SECTOR OBJECTIVE 2 : Improve the quality of teaching and learning for refugee and host community children 
and youth, aligned with Education Sector standards, and increase teaching-related professional development 
opportunities, and supporting relevant improvement to education for host community children 
Related to Strategic Objective 1 & 2 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET DATA SOURCE ORGANIZATION FREQUENCY 
# of teachers/learning facilitators 
from the host and refugee community 
who participate in basic/foundational 
training 
8,288 4,593 3,695 5W All active partners 
Fortnightly 
# of continuous professional development 
(PD) sessions for teachers/ 
learning facilitators (PD on at least 
one unique topic per month) 
2,842 N/A 2,842 5W All active partners 
Monthly 
# of learners receiving adequate 
education materials, supplies and 
equipment aligned with Education 
Sector standards (in refugee and 
host community) 
696,400 171,101 462,460 5W All active partners 
Fortnightly 
SECTOR OBJECTIVE 3 : Increase refugee and host community participation and engagement in the education of 
children and youth 
Related to Strategic Objective 3 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET DATA SOURCE ORGANIZATION FREQUENCY 
# of School and Community Education 
Committees (CECs) trained 
on learning facility/school management, 
Disaster Risk Reduction/ 
Preparedness & Response, and 
participatory engagement of the 
community (women, men, girls, 
boys) (with 50% female participation). 
5,027 1,517 3,000 5W All active 
partners 
Fortnightly 
# of caregivers (disaggregated by 
sex and refugee/host community) 
sensitized on child/youth rights, 
protection and parenting 
200,000 70,547 200,000 5W All active partners 
Fortnightly 
# of refugee and host children, 
youth and community members 
(disaggregated by sex and age) engaged 
in social cohesion initiatives 
(extra-curricular activities) 
696,400 87,420 200,000 5W All active partners 
Fortnightly 
SITE MANAGEMENT AND SITE DEVELOPMENT 
SECTOR OBJECTIVE 1 : Support the Government of Bangladesh Camp in Charge Officials (CiC) in managing 
the Camps, ensuring equitable and safe access of refugees to standardized and monitored assistance and 
protection, against agreed standards, coordinating multi-hazard preparedness and community engagement and 
representation 
Related to Strategic Objective 1 & 2 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET DATA SOURCE ORGANIZATION 
FREQUENCY 
% of refugees living in camps where 
a community representation system 
is in place. 
100% 
(899, 000) 
8% 
(72,000) 
100% Site reports, 
meetings and 4W 
SMS agencies 
Fortnightly

77 
% of refugees living in camps where 
a functioning service monitoring 
system is in place. 
100% 
(899,000) 
N/A 100% Site reports, 
meetings and 4W 
SMS agencies 
Fortnightly 
# of sector members and partners 
trained in site management 
N/A 992 100% Capacity building 
reports 
Area coordination 
and SMS 
agencies 
Fortnightly 
% of refugees living in camps with 
a multi- hazard plan developed and 
applied 
100% 
(899,000) 
N/A 100% Camp-based plans SMS agencies 
N/A 
SECTOR OBJECTIVE 2 : Holistically upgrade the settlement areas and their immediate surroundings, through 
community-participatory and mid-term macro planning, linked to construction and maintenance works that 
enable safe, dignified and resilient living conditions 
Related to Strategic Objective 2 & 3 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET DATA SOURCE ORGANIZATION 
FREQUENCY 
% of refugees safely living within 
acceptable space standards and 
with rationalized access to services 
(site planning) 
100% 
(899,000) 
0 50% Site planning and site 
development reports, 
meetings and 4W 
Site planning 
agencies 
Fortnightly 
% of refugees living within 300m of 
year-round vehicular access roads 
and 50m from durable, year-round 
pedestrian pathways 
100% 
(899,000) 
N/A 70% Site planning and site 
development reports, 
meetings and 4W 
Site development 
and 
site improvement 
agencies 
Fortnightly 
% of individuals living in camps and 
communities where natural hazards 
have been comprehensively 
mapped and reduced through DRR 
activities to acceptable levels as 
defined by the sector 
100% 
(1,074,476) 
80% Environment and 
DRR reports, meetings 
and 4W 
DRR and 
environment 
agencies 
Fortnightly 
SECTOR OBJECTIVE 3 : Support informed humanitarian decision-making and synergized identification of needs, 
access to services and gaps among the refugees 
Related to Strategic Objective 1 & 2 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET DATA SOURCE ORGANIZATION 
FREQUENCY 
% of refugees whose needs and 
access to service are regularly assessed 
100% 
(906,000) 
100% 100% NPM and REACH 
reports and assessments 
Assessment 
and monitoring 
agencies 
Monthly 
HEALTH 
SECTOR OBJECTIVE 1 : Improve equitable access to and utilization of quality lifesaving and comprehensive 
primary and secondary health services for crisis-affected populations with special focus on sexual reproductive, 
maternal, neonatal, child and adolescent health; mental health and psychosocial support; and noncommunicable 
diseases 
Related to Strategic Objective 1, 2 & 3 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET DATA SOURCE ORGANIZATION 
FREQUENCY 
# of Primary Health Centres providing 
services 24/7 
36 (covering 
906,512 refugees) 
17 36 Health Facility Registry 
Health 
Sector 
Monthly 
ANNEXES 

78 
Coverage of Pentavalent among 
<1-year olds (disaggregated by sex 
and Upazila) 
100% 
(30,175 (children 
<1) 
67% >95% Concurrent monitoring 
DGHS/WHO/ 
UNICEF 
Bi-annual 
% of deliveries assisted by a skilled 
birth attendant 
100% 
(among 
325,000 Women 
of Reproductive 
Age) 
43% >55% DHIS-2/Community 
Surveillance 
Health Sector/
Community 
Health 
WG 
Bi-annual 
% of Primary Health Centres with 
at least one health care provider 
trained on MhGAP 
100% (covering 
906,512 
(refugee 
population) 
N/A 100% MHPSS 4Ws MHPSS WG Bi-annual 
SECTOR OBJECTIVE 2 : Ensure the prevention and timely response to outbreaks of diseases with epidemic 
potential and prepare for other health emergencies including monsoon and cyclone 
Related to Strategic Objective 1 & 2 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET DATA SOURCE ORGANIZATION 
FREQUENCY 
# of diarrhoea treatment beds available 
in case of an outbreak 
250 (covering 
1,242,442 refugees 
and host 
community) 
233 250 Health Facility Registry 
Health 
Sector 
Quarterly 
% of verified and confirmed EWARS 
alerts investigated within 48 hours 
100% (covering 
1,242,442 refugees 
and host 
community) 
100% 100% EWARS WHO Quarterly 
SECTOR OBJECTIVE 3: Encourage healthy living, improve health seeking behaviour and utilisation of essential 
service package among refugees and host populations through community engagement, with special attention 
to gender considerations and vulnerable groups 
Related to Strategic Objective 1 , 2 & 3 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET DATA SOURCE ORGANIZATION 
FREQUENCY 
% of pregnant women reported 
to have attended an NGO or government 
clinic at least once since 
the start of their pregnancy to get 
advice or treatment related to the 
pregnancy 
100% (of 
approximately 
22000 pregnant 
refugee 
women 
72% 
among 
refugees 
100% MSNA (or other population 
survey) 
Bi-annual 
# of trained Community Health 
Workers/Volunteers 
1,208 (covering 
906,512 
refugees 
503 (fully 
trained) 
1,208 Community Health 
Working Group 
REACH/UNHCR 
Quarterly 
# of group sessions held by CHW/V 
(1 per CHW/V per week) 
62,816 
(covering 
906,512 
refugees) 
N/A 47, 112 
(75% of 
need) 
Community 
Health Working 
GroupCommunity 
Health Working 
Group 
REACH/UNHCR 
Quarterly 
ANNEXES 

79 
SECTOR OBJECTIVE 4 : Strengthen health sector coordination and information management with a focus on 
rational and accountable health service delivery systems, including monitoring of minimum standards and the 
quality of the services provided. 
Related to Strategic Objective 1, 2 & 3 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET DATA SOURCE ORGANIZATION 
FREQUENCY 
% of primary health centers; health 
posts and field hospitals who received 
supportive supervision by 
health sector at least twice per year 
100% (covering 
906,512 refugees) 
100% of 
health 
facilities 
visited 
at least 
twice/year 
100% of 
health 
facilities 
visited 
at least 
twice/year 
Monitoring checklist Health 
Sector 
Bi-annual 
# of health sector coordination 
meetings held at upazilla and district 
level according to monthly 
schedule (3/month) 
36 (covering 
1,242,442 refugees 
and host 
community) 
29 (80% of 
need) 
29 (80% of 
need) 
Monitoring checklist Health 
Sector 
Monthly 
# of camps with camp health focal 
points 
34 (covering 
906,512 refugees) 
34 34 Health sector contact 
list 
Health 
Sector 
Monthly 
NUTRITION 
SECTOR OBJECTIVE 1 : To reduce excess mortality and morbidity among boys and girls under 5 years, Pregnant 
and Lactating Women (PLW) and other vulnerable groups through provision of life-saving interventions to treat 
Severe and Moderate Acute Malnutrition 
Related to Strategic Objective 2 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET DATA SOURCE ORGANIZATION 
FREQUENCY 
# of boys and girls aged 6-59 
months with SAM newly admitted 
for treatment 
38,390 0 34,551 Monthly reports Sector 
partners 
Monthly 
# of boys and girls aged 6-59 
months with MAM newly admitted 
for treatment 
95,191 0 80,981 Monthly reports Sector 
partners 
Monthly 
% of discharged SAM & MAM cases 
who recovered = 75% 
= 75% 0% = 75% Monthly reports Sector 
partners 
Monthly 
SECTOR OBJECTIVE 2 : To reduce the burden of malnutrition among boys, girls, Pregnant and Lactating Women 
(PLW) and other vulnerable groups through the strengthening and scale up of malnutrition prevention interventions 
Related to Strategic Objective 1, 2 & 3 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET DATA SOURCE ORGANIZATION 
FREQUENCY 
# of boys and girls aged 6-59 
months reached with Vitamin A 
supplementation 
225,876 0 191,074 Vitamin A campaign 
reports 
UNICEF Semi-annually 
# of boys and girls aged 6-59 
months reached with Blanket Supplementary 
Feeding Programmes 
179,348 0 161,413 Monthly reports Sector partners 
Monthly 
# of new PLWs receiving Maternal 
Nutrition and IYCF counselling 
61,540 0 55,544 Monthly reports Nutrition 
sector 
Monthly 
ANNEXES

80 
WATER, SANITATION AND HYGIENE 
SECTOR OBJECTIVE 1 : Ensure effective, sufficient and equitable provision of life saving water and sanitation 
services for targeted men, women, boys and girls 
Related to Strategic Objective 2 & 3 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET DATA SOURCE ORGANIZATION 
FREQUENCY 
# of targeted people in camps benefitting 
from at least 20 l/p/d safe 
water for drinking and other domestic 
purposes 
906,511 607,600 100% Infrastructure mapping 
4W 
Water quality monitoring 
Key informant interviews 
REACH 
WASH Partners 
DPHE / 
WHO 
IOM NPM / 
UNICEF/UNHCR 
Monthly 
# of targeted people disaggregated 
by sex and age in camps who are 
benefitting from functional and appropriately 
designed latrines 
906,511 602,750 906,511 Infrastructure mapping 
4W 
REACH 
WASH Partners 
Monthly 
# of targeted people in host communities 
who are benefiting from 
water and sanitation services (disaggregated 
by sex) 
355,930 130,100 355,930 4W 
Water quality monitoring 
Key informant interviews 
Household survey 
WASH Partners 
DPHE / 
WHO 
IOM NPM 
UNICEF 
Monthly 
SECTOR OBJECTIVE 2 : Ensure that all targeted women, men, girls and boys have the means and are 
encouraged to adopt individual and collective measures increasing health seeking behaviors to mitigate public 
health risks for the well-being of the affected population 
Related to Strategic Objective 2 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET DATA SOURCE ORGANIZATION 
FREQUENCY 
% of targeted people disaggregated 
by sex and age) able to demonstrate 
at least 3 critical hygiene 
practices 
N/A TBD 70% KAP Survey 
Household Survey 
Key informant interview 
NPM 
REACH 
WASH Partners 
Every 3 
months 
% of targeted women, men, boy 
and girls (1.2 million) who have received 
and are satisfied with the 
hygiene related information shared 
N/A TBD 80% Satisfaction Survey 
Feedback/Complaints 
mechanisms 
NPM 
CWC 
WASH Partners, 
REACH 
Every 3 
months 
# of targeted households in need 
who have received a WASH Hygiene 
kit and/or a top up kit and/or 
a voucher in the last three months 
248,488 248,488 4W WASH partners 
Monthly 
SECTOR OBJECTIVE 3 : Ensure that all WASH assistance promotes protection, safety and dignity of targeted 
men, women, boys and girls with focus on sustainable resilience-building approaches 
Related to Strategic Objective 1 & 3 
ANNEXES 

81 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET DATA SOURCE ORGANIZATION 
FREQUENCY 
% of targeted people disaggregated 
by sex and age including older 
people and those with disabilities 
who are satisfied with the WASH 
response 
N/A TBD 80% Satisfaction survey 
Feedback and complaints 
mechanisms 
NPM 
WASH Partners, 
REACH 
Every 3 
months 
% of targeted women and girls of 
reproductive age who have their 
menstrual hygiene needs met 
281,865 TBD 60% Satisfaction survey 
Feedback and complaints 
mechanisms 
NPM, 
WASH partners, 
Monthly 
% of WASH partners respecting the 
five minimum commitments regarding 
safety and dignity of affected 
population in WASH programming 
N/A TBD 75% Survey (5 minimum 
commitments tools 
developed by GWC) 
WASH Sector 
coordination 
platform 
Every 3 
months 
SHELTER AND NON-FOOD ITEMS (NFI) 
SECTOR OBJECTIVE 1 : Provide lifesaving emergency Shelter/NFI support to households affected by natural 
disasters or other shocks 
Related to Strategic Objective 2 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET DATA SOURCE ORGANIZATION 
FREQUENCY 
% of HH receiving emergency Shelter/
NFI assistance post natural disaster 
or shock 
N/A 100% 100% Shelter/NFI Sector 
Partners 
Shelter/NFI 
Sector Team 
Bi-weekly 
# of emergency Shelter/NFI kits 
prepositioned 
N/A 113,320 90,000 Shelter/NFI Sector 
Partners 
Shelter/NFI 
Sector Team 
Monthly 
SECTOR OBJECTIVE 2 : Improve living conditions, contributing to reduced suffering, disaster risk reduction, and 
enhanced protection, dignity, and safety 
Related to Strategic Objective 1 & 2 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET DATA SOURCE ORGANIZATION 
FREQUENCY 
# of HH benefitting from transitional 
shelter assistance 
180,000 0 145,000 Shelter/NFI Sector 
Partners 
Shelter/NFI 
Sector Team 
Bi-weekly 
# of HH benefitting from mid-term 
shelters 
180,000 0 35,000 Shelter/NFI Sector 
Partners 
Shelter/NFI 
Sector Team 
Bi-weekly 
# of HH benefitting from improved 
HH level lighting solutions 
180,000 0 180,000 Shelter/NFI Sector 
Partners 
Shelter/NFI 
Sector Team 
Bi-weekly 
SECTOR OBJECTIVE 3 : Improve social cohesion and enhance resilience 
Related to Strategic Objective 3 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET DATA SOURCE ORGANIZATION 
FREQUENCY 
# of host community HH benefitting 
from Shelter/NFI assistance 
TBC 3,550 25,000 Shelter/NFI Sector 
Partners 
Shelter/NFI 
Sector Team 
Bi-weekly 
Develop and adhere to a Cox’s Bazar 
customized HLP strategy 
N/A 0 1 Shelter/NFI Sector 
Team 
Shelter/NFI 
Sector Team 
Quarterly 
ANNEXES 

82 
# of HH benefitting from HLP assistance 
N/A 0 13,980 Shelter/NFI Sector 
Partners 
Shelter/NFI 
Sector Team 
Bi-weekly 
SECTOR OBJECTIVE 4 : Promote use of sustainable solutions to reduce impact on the environment 
Related to Strategic Objective 3 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET DATA SOURCE ORGANIZATION 
FREQUENCY 
# of HH benefitting from the use of 
LPG for cooking. 
180,000 28,407 180,000 Shelter/NFI Sector 
Partners 
Shelter/NFI 
Sector Team 
Bi-weekly 
Bamboo TWiG (durability, treatment, 
and livelihoods) is set up and 
operational. 
N/A 0 1 Shelter/NFI Sector 
Team 
Shelter/NFI 
Sector Team 
Quarterly 
A nation-wide bamboo supply 
chain assessment is developed 
and updated semiannually. 
N/A 0 1 Shelter/NFI Sector 
Team 
Shelter/NFI 
Sector Team 
Quarterly 
COMMUNICATION WITH COMMUNITES 
SECTOR OBJECTIVE 1 : Strengthen coordination and advocacy towards the integration and reinforcement 
of Communication with Communities capacities and community engagement to ensure comprehensive 
accessibility to life-saving information and knowledge on rights and available resources by affected populations 
across sectors 
Related to Strategic Objective 1, 2 & 3 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET DATA SOURCE ORGANIZATION 
FREQUENCY 
% of women, men, girls and boys 
who report that they have comprehensive 
access to relevant lifesaving 
information 
100% 4% 65% IAssessments, Study, 
Research, Baseline/ 
mid-line/Evaluation 
(with SADD) 
CwC 
Members, 
ISCG, IOM 
NPM, Other 
research 
agencies 
Quarterly 
# of agencies, sectors and platforms 
using services and tools 
produced by CwC Working Group 
members 
113 44 75 Assessments, Study, 
Research, Baseline/ 
mid-line/Evaluation 
CwC WG, 
CwC Members, 
ISCG 
Half 
yearly 
# of cyclone information sharing/ 
orientation sessions prior to each 
cyclone season 
1,020 309 1020 4W, Assessments, 
Study, Research (with 
SADD) 
CwC Members, 
Site 
Mgt Agencies 
After 
each 
cyclone 
season 
SECTOR OBJECTIVE 2 : Establish and reinforce needs-based, actionable, two-way and multi-sectoral communication 
resources and strengthen dissemination and access to information 
Related to Strategic Objective 1, 2 & 3 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET DATA SOURCE ORGANIZATION 
FREQUENCY 
# communication resources (info 
hubs and CwC materials) are established 
and reinforced/functional 
450 360 450 Info-Hub database, 
content mapping 
CwC members, 
Site 
Management 
Agencies 
Quarterly 
% of women, men, girls and boys 
reporting communication resources 
as relevant to their needs 
80% 45% 75% Assessments, Study, 
Research, Baseline/ 
mid-line/Evaluation 
(with SADD) 
CwC Members, 
ISCG/ 
NPM, Other 
research 
agencies 
Quarterly 
ANNEXES 

83 
SECTOR OBJECTIVE 3 : Strengthen participation of, and accountability to affected women, men, girls and boys 
through effective community engagement, participatory approaches and functional feedback and complaint 
response mechanisms 
Related to Strategic Objective 1, 2 & 3 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET DATA SOURCE ORGANIZATION 
FREQUENCY 
% of women, men, girls and boys 
who consider feedback mechanisms 
accessible 
80% 42% 75% Assessments, Study, 
Research, Baseline/ 
mid-line/Evaluation 
(with SADD) 
CwC Members, 
ISCG/ 
NPM, Other 
research 
agencies 
Quarterly 
% of women, men, girls and boys 
who report being consulted on decision 
making that affect their lives 
80% 52% 75% Assessments, Study, 
Research, Baseline/ 
mid-line/Evaluation 
(with SADD) 
CwC Members, 
ISCG/ 
NPM, Other 
research 
agencies 
Quarterly 
EMERGENCY TELECOMMUNICATIONS 
SECTOR OBJECTIVE 1 : Increase the existing telecommunications capacity in the response areas to facilitate 
the safe, effective delivery of aid and strengthen the emergency preparedness and response capabilities of 
humanitarian actors 
Related to Strategic Objective 2 & 3 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET DATA SOURCE ORGANIZATION FREQUENCY 
Emergency telecommunications 
equipment kits prepositioned 
1 0 1 Physical asset WFP Quarterly 
Connectivity to common humanitarian 
areas within the camp via a 
wireless point to point network 
1 2 humanitarian 
hubs with 
internet 
access 
10 points 
of connectivity 
Mapping of connected 
areas 
WFP Quarterly 
# of NGOs utilising telecommunications 
services 
7 0 7 Stakeholder 
feedback 
WFP Quarterly 
# of meetings held by/with camp 
FSS focal point persons 
N/A 12 (at least 
one per 
month) 
Meeting records/
Minutes 
Food Security 
Sector 
Monthly 
SECTOR OBJECTIVE 2 : Collaborate with inter-sector initiatives to improve affected communities’ access to vital 
information and communication services by implementing technical solutions and capacity building partners 
Related to Strategic Objective 1 & 2 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET DATA SOURCE ORGANIZATION FREQUENCY 
# of organizations using ETC Connect 
app as a feedback mechanism 
N/A 2 6 Application WFP Quarterly 
# of information hubs supported 
with service and audio visual and 
power equipment 
37 29 37 Information Hub 
partners 
CwC working 
group 
Quarterly 
# of Inter-agency, NGO and Government 
organizations trained on 
ETS services 
14 7 14 Training attendance 
sheets 
WFP Quarterly 
ANNEXES 

84 
SECTOR OBJECTIVE 3 : Increase the effectiveness of the humanitarian response through technical assistance, 
coordination, information sharing and facilitation activities 
Related to Strategic Objective 2 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET DATA SOURCE ORGANIZATION FREQUENCY 
# of communication resources (info 
hubs and CwC materials are established 
and reinforced/functional 
450 360 450 Info hub database, 
content 
mapping 
CwC members, 
Site Management 
Agencies 
Quarterly 
% of women, men, girls and boys 
reporting communication resources 
as relevant to their needs 
80% 45% 75% Assessments, 
Study, Research, 
Baseline/midline/
Evaluation 
(with SADD) 
CwC Members, 
ISCG/NPM, 
Other research 
agencies 
Quarterly 
LOGISTICS 
SECTOR OBJECTIVE 1 : Improve logistics operations based on incentivized and supported joint operational 
efforts and shared use of key logistics resources through the facilitation of coordinated efforts and strengthening 
of local logistics capacity 
Related to Strategic Objective 3 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET DATA SOURCE ORGANIZATION 
FREQUENCY 
% of Logistics Sector partners’ satisfaction 
feedback rated as “Satisfied” 
and “Very Satisfied” in regard 
to coordination initiatives 
n/a 88% 88 Stakeholder Survey Logistics 
Sector 
6 months 
# of organizations actively participating 
in coordination meetings 
n/a 40 40 Meeting Minutes Logistics Bi-annual 
# of logistics staff attending training 
activities 
n/a 58 75 Training Attendance 
Sheets 
Logistics 
Sector 
Quarterly 
SECTOR OBJECTIVE 2: Collect, produce and share timely and accurate data and information in support of 
humanitarian logistics operations, and to ensure transparency of all Logistics Sector activities 
Related to Strategic Objective 3 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET DATA SOURCE ORGANIZATION 
FREQUENCY 
% of Logistics Sector partners’ satisfaction 
feedback rated as “Satisfied” 
and “Very Satisfied” in regard 
to IM products 
n/a 73% 85% Stakeholder Survey Logistics 
Sector 
6 months 
# of Logistics Capacity Assessment 
updates 
n/a 1 15 DLCA Website Logistics 
Sector 
Quarterly 
# of access to Logistics Sector - 
Bangladesh website 
n/a 8,559 8,559 Google Analytics Logistics 
Sector 
Quarterly/ 
yearly 
SECTOR OBJECTIVE 3: Assess, design and implement logistics services to address commonly identified gaps 
and bottleneck in the supply chain, and enhance the humanitarian response through supplementary logistics 
support 
Related to Strategic Objective 3 
ANNEXES 

85 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET DATA SOURCE ORGANIZATION 
FREQUENCY 
% of Logistics Sector partners’ satisfaction 
feedback rated as “Satisfied” 
and “Very Satisfied” in regard 
to common logistics services 
n/a 94% 94% Stakeholder Survey Logistics 
Sector 
Quarterly 
% of storage service requests delivered 
in full (accepted, storage provided 
and released) 
n/a 100% 90% Relief Item Tracking 
Application 
Logistics 
Sector 
Quarterly 
# of organizations using common 
logistics services 
n/a 21 20 Relief Item Tracking 
Application 
Logistics 
Sector 
Quarterly 
COORDINATION 
SECTOR OBJECTIVE 1 : Support Rohingya refugee response leadership and coordination to ensure an effective 
response 
Related to Strategic Objective 1, 2 & 3 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET DATA SOURCE ORGANIZATION 
FREQUENCY 
# of people in need disaggregated 
by sex and age receiving multi-sector 
assistance 
1,242,442 906,512 disaggregated 
Sector reports/ 
Sitreps/Mid-Term 
Review 
Sectors/Secretariat 
Bi-weekly/ 
Monthly 
# of functional SEG, Inter-Sector 
Coordination and district HoSO 
meetings held and minutes shared 
n/a 134 134 Meeting minutes Secretariat/ 
RCO 
Quarterly 
# of partners using the coordination 
hubs 
n/a 40 45 partners 
Hub Reports Secretariat Quarterly 
# of priority thematic and operational 
coordination meetings held 
and minutes shared (Cash WG, 
GiHA WG, CMCoord, local authority 
meetings focused on social cohesion 
at Upazila and DC level) 
n/a 108 minutes Secretariat/ 
GiHA WG 
Quarterly 
# of contingency plan and SIMEX 
for cyclone/natural disaster response 
conducted in timely manner 
with all relevant stakeholders 
n/a 2 SIMEX reports Secretariat Quarterly 
SECTOR OBJECTIVE 2: Promote common understanding of context, needs, priorities, response progress and 
gaps 
Related to Strategic Objective 1, 2 & 3 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET DATA SOURCE ORGANIZATION 
FREQUENCY 
# of sitreps produced and shared, 
which include detailed sex, age 
and diversity disaggregated data, 
situation and gender analysis from 
all sectors, and clearly identify gaps 
n/a 36 12 SitReps SitReps Secretariat Monthly 
# of 4W and other IM products released 
that are comprehensive and 
actively used for operational and 
strategic decision making 
n/a 36 12 4Ws Products Secretariat Monthly 
# of coordinated multi-sector 
needs assessments conducted and 
released for affected populations 
(host communities and refugees) 
n/a 2 MSNANC 
Survey Reports Secretariat/ 
REACH/NPM 
Twice per 
year each 
MSNA 
ANNEXES 

86 
# of MSNA updates produced 
on status of implementation 
of the Cyclone Preparedness/ 
Contingency Plan 
n/a 6 Updates Secretariat EPU 
(weekly 
during 
monsoon 
season) 
SECTOR OBJECTIVE 3: Lead advocacy and resource mobilization efforts for the Rohingya refugee response 
Related to Strategic Objective 1, 2 & 3 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET DATA SOURCE ORGANIZATION 
FREQUENCY 
# of donor and high-level visits to 
Cox’s Bazar facilitated, and donor / 
resource mobilisation events 
n/a 15 20 Visits tracking Secretariat Quarterly 
# of JRP monitoring/funding reports, 
inclusive of JRP funding analysis, 
produced and shared 
n/a 12 Mid-Term Review Mid-year 
Support the development of a Centrality 
of Protection Action Plan in 
collaboration with actors and regularly 
monitored 
n/a 8 SEG 
meeting 
that 
review 
progress 
against 
the Plan 
SEG minutes Quarterly 
SECTOR OBJECTIVE 4: Promote an integrated and multi-sector approach to protection and gender 
mainstreaming 
Related to Strategic Objective 1, 2 & 3 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET DATA SOURCE ORGANIZATION 
FREQUENCY 
# of PSEA, GBV and Protection focal 
points trained and functional 
36 N/A 12 One-to-one meetings 
between coordinators 
Sector Coordinators 
Quarterly 
# of trainings/workshops on Gender, 
GBV, PSEA, Protection maintreaming 
conducted for sectors and 
partners 
N/A N/A 2 Qualitative reports 
will illustrate examples 
from each 
sector 
ISCG Secretariat 
On need 
# of sectors whose work plan/ 
strategy includes the development 
of programming tools which mainstream 
protection/gender 
N/A N/A 10 One-to-one meetings 
between coordinators 
PWG, Sector 
Coordinators 
Quarterly 
# of policy & advocacy products 
produced on Gender/GBV/PSEA 
N/A 2 3 Qualitative reports 
will illustrate examples 
from each 
sector 
ISCG Secretariat 
On need 
ANNEXES 
Photo Credit: DCA / Tina Sletting Jakobsen / 2017

87 
PROTECTION 
PROTECTION 
1,242,000ppl 
9 11 4 
PEOPLE TARGETED 
NUMBER OF JRP 
ORGANIZATIONS 
336,000ppl 
Bangladeshi Host 
Communities Refugees in Camps 
Refugees in 
Host Communities 
8 99,000ppl 7,000ppl 
CHILD PROTECTION 
284,000ppl 
7 13 4 NUMBER OF JRP 
ORGANIZATIONS 
0ppl 2 82,000ppl 2,000ppl 
GENDER BASED VIOLENCE 
610,000ppl 
7 13 4 NUMBER OF JRP 
ORGANIZATIONS 
0ppl 6 05,000ppl 5,000ppl 
PROTECTION 
PARTICIPATING ORGANIZATION REQUIREMENTS 
(US$) 
ACT Alliance / Christian Aid 319,430 
Bangladesh Rural Advancement Committee 765,000 
Caritas Bangladesh 201,354 
Danish Refugee Council 1,222,400 
HelpAge International UK 558,000 
Helvetas Swiss Intercooperation 380,000 
International Organization for Migration 2,750,600 
Norwegian Refugee Council 1,000,000 
OXFAM 1,697,168 
UN Women 1,070,202 
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees 28,900,000 
TOTAL 38,864,154 
CHILD PROTECTION 
PARTICIPATING ORGANIZATION REQUIREMENTS 
(US$) 
Agrajattra Organization 249,855 
Bangladesh Rural Advancement Committee 617,424 
Caritas Bangladesh 410,331 
ANNEX III 
ORGANIZATIONS AND FUNDING REQUIREMENTS 
ANNEXES

88 
ANNEXES 
PARTICIPATING ORGANIZATION REQUIREMENTS 
(US$) 
CBM International 46,921 
Danish Refugee Council 407,891 
International Organization for Migration 600,000 
Plan International 911,981 
Save the Children 1,550,040 
Terre des Hommes - Lausanne 490,000 
United Nations Children's Fund 11,773,180 
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees 5,677,505 
World Concern Development Organization 300,000 
World Vision Bangladesh 500,058 
TOTAL 23,535,186 
GENDER BASED VIOLENCE
PARTICIPATING ORGANIZATION REQUIREMENTS 
(US$) 
ACT Alliance / DanChurchAid 484,167 
Action Contre la Faim (ACF) 194,000 
Bangladesh Rural Advancement Committee 828,475 
CARE International 600,000 
Caritas Bangladesh 139,402 
Danish Refugee Council 140,000 
International Organization for Migration 1,545,295 
International Rescue Committee 1,200,000 
Relief International 340,075 
United Nations Children's Fund 3,814,276 
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees 7,119,560 
United Nations Population Fund 6,557,000 
World Vision Bangladesh 508,858 
TOTAL 23,471,108 
FOOD SECURITY 
FOOD SECURITY 
1,242,000ppl 
18 21 8 
PEOPLE TARGETED 
NUMBER OF JRP 
ORGANIZATIONS 
336,000ppl 
Bangladeshi Host 
Communities Refugees in Camps Refugees in 
Host Communities 
89 9,000ppl 7,000ppl 
PARTICIPATING ORGANIZATION REQUIREMENTS 
(US$) 
ACT Alliance / Christian Aid 975,863 
ACT Alliance / DanChurchAid 330,957 
ACT Alliance / Interchurch Organization for Development Co-operation 3,707,878 
Action Contre la Faim (ACF) 9,448,282 
Agrajattra Organization 763,631

89 
PARTICIPATING ORGANIZATION REQUIREMENTS 
(US$) 
Bangladesh Rural Advancement Committee 4,311,348 
Caritas Bangladesh 615,500 
Concern Worldwide 3,097,146 
Food & Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 4,703,000 
Helvetas Swiss Intercooperation 888,476 
International Organization for Migration 5,000,000 
International Rescue Committee 250,000 
Mukti Cox's Bazar 1,861,338 
OXFAM 7,091,965 
Qatar Charity 3,186,970 
Relief International 3,306,941 
Save the Children 1,975,351 
Solidarités International (SI) 419,937 
UN Women 1,849,336 
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees 3,000,000 
World Food Programme 195,763,581 
World Vision Bangladesh 2,452,500 
TOTAL 255,000,000 
EDUCATION 
EDUCATION 
463,000ppl 
6 12 2 
PEOPLE TARGETED 
NUMBER OF JRP 
ORGANIZATIONS 
120,000ppl 
Bangladeshi Host 
Communities Refugees in Camps 
Refugees in 
Host Communities 
34 0,000ppl 3000ppl 
PARTICIPATING ORGANIZATION REQUIREMENTS 
(US$) 
ACT Alliance / DanChurchAid 332,092 
Bangladesh Rural Advancement Committee 4,545,069 
COAST Trust 328,042 
Friendship 141,565 
International Rescue Committee 60,500 
Mukti Cox's Bazar 1,067,922 
Norwegian Refugee Council 775,051 
Plan International 2,749,088 
Relief International 313,514 
Save the Children 2,455,649 
United Nations Children's Fund 34,000,000 
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees 12,267,202 
World Vision Bangladesh 464,256 
TOTAL 59,499,950 
ANNEXES

90 
SITE MANAGEMENT 
SITE MANAGEMENT 
1,242,000ppl 
4 7 1 
PEOPLE TARGETED 
NUMBER OF JRP 
ORGANIZATIONS 
336,000ppl 
Bangladeshi Host 
Communities Refugees in Camps 
Refugees in 
Host Communities 
89 9,000ppl 7,000ppl 
PARTICIPATING ORGANIZATION REQUIREMENTS 
(US$) 
ACT Alliance / Christian Aid 549,964 
CARE International 400,000 
Caritas Bangladesh 1,000,000 
International Organization for Migration 41,200,000 
Norwegian Refugee Council 100,000 
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees 47,500,000 
World Food Programme 7,986,539 
TOTAL 98,736,503 
HEALTH 
HEALTH 
1,242,000ppl 
14 24 5 
PEOPLE TARGETED 
NUMBER OF JRP 
ORGANIZATIONS 
336,000ppl 
Bangladeshi Host 
Communities Refugees in Camps 
Refugees in 
Host Communities 
89 9,000ppl 7,000ppl 
PARTICIPATING ORGANIZATION REQUIREMENTS 
(US$) 
ACT Alliance / Christian Aid 400,398 
Action Contre la Faim (ACF) 1,091,603 
Bangladesh Rural Advancement Committee 5,281,098 
CARE International 500,000 
CBM International 1,332,615 
Dalit 149,883 
Friendship 1,856,500 
Health and Education for All 757,810 
HelpAge International UK 570,000 
HOPE Foundation for Woman and Children of Bangladesh 500,000 
International Organization for Migration 12,455,876 
Mercy Malaysia 400,000 
OBAT Helpers 839,686 
Peace Winds Japan 400,000 
Première Urgence Internationale 1,000,000 
Qatar Charity 400,000 
ANNEXES

91 
PARTICIPATING ORGANIZATION REQUIREMENTS 
(US$) 
Relief International 975,549 
Rokeya Foundation - Rohingya Women Welfare Society 255,372 
Save the Children 3,055,440 
Terre des Hommes - Lausanne 924,296 
United Nations Children's Fund 15,608,320 
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees 14,779,200 
United Nations Population Fund 13,000,000 
World Concern Development Organization 568,233 
World Health Organization 11,646,707 
TOTAL 88,748,586 
NUTRITION 
NUTRITION 
348,000ppl 
5 8 2 
PEOPLE TARGETED 
NUMBER OF JRP 
ORGANIZATIONS 
44,000ppl 
Bangladeshi Host 
Communities Refugees in Camps 
Refugees in 
Host Communities 
3 01,000ppl 2,000ppl 
PARTICIPATING ORGANIZATION REQUIREMENTS 
(US$) 
Action Contre la Faim (ACF) 1,722,143 
Concern Worldwide 570,000 
Save the Children (SCI) 660,000 
United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) 14,940,000 
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) 7,500,000 
World Concern Development Organization 700,000 
World Food Programme (WFP) 21,500,000 
World Vision Bangladesh 458,000 
TOTAL 48,050,143 
SHELTER AND NON-FOOD ITEMS 
SHELTER & NFI 
1,032,000ppl 
7 16 2 
PEOPLE TARGETED 
NUMBER OF JRP 
ORGANIZATIONS 
125,000ppl 
Bangladeshi Host 
Communities Refugees in Camps 
Refugees in 
Host Communities 
8 99,000ppl 7,000ppl 
PARTICIPATING ORGANIZATION REQUIREMENTS 
(US$) 
ACT Alliance / Christian Aid 4,953,813 
ACT Alliance / DanChurchAid 435,867 
ANNEXES

92 
PARTICIPATING ORGANIZATION REQUIREMENTS 
(US$) 
Agrajattra Organization 800,000 
Bangladesh Rural Advancement Committee 5,352,239 
CARE International 1,966,800 
Caritas Bangladesh 5,385,000 
Community Partners International 100,030 
Concern Worldwide 225,000 
Friends in Village Development Bangladesh 2,805,430 
Friendship 903,659 
HEKS - Hilfswerk der Evangelischen Kirchen Schweiz 1,700,000 
International Organization for Migration 48,586,213 
PULSE - Bangladesh 863,450 
Qatar Charity 4,989,000 
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees 48,586,000 
World Concern Development Organization 1,147,500 
TOTAL 128,800,001 
WATER, SANITATION AND HYGIENE 
WASH 
1,052,000ppl 
14 19 6 
PEOPLE TARGETED 
NUMBER OF JRP 
ORGANIZATIONS 
284,000ppl 
Bangladeshi Host 
Communities Refugees in Camps 
Refugees in 
Host Communities 
76 2,000ppl 6,000ppl 
PARTICIPATING ORGANIZATION REQUIREMENTS 
(US$) 
ACT Alliance / Christian Aid 800,246 
Action Contre la Faim (ACF) 7,514,829 
Agency for Technical Cooperation and Development (ACTED) 395,010 
Bangladesh Rural Advancement Committee (BRAC) 25,164,472 
CARE International 718,316 
Caritas Bangladesh 501,250 
Concern Worldwide 7,980 
Deutsche Welthungerhilfe e.V. (German Agro Action) 395,010 
Friendship 1,673,756 
HEKS - Hilfswerk der Evangelischen Kirchen Schweiz 596,358 
Helvetas Swiss Intercooperation 872,813 
International Organization for Migration (IOM) 19,611,874 
International Rescue Committee (IRC) 250,000 
Mukti Cox's Bazar 380,768 
OXFAM 2,726,599 
Première Urgence Internationale (PUI) 875,000 
Save the Children (SCI) 692,611 
Solidarités International (SI) 2,475,489 
Terre des Hommes - Lausanne 700,000 
United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) 30,000,000 
ANNEXES

93 
PARTICIPATING ORGANIZATION REQUIREMENTS 
(US$) 
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) 39,243,127 
World Vision Bangladesh 1,050,000 
TOTAL 136,645,508 
LOGISTICS 
PARTICIPATING ORGANIZATION REQUIREMENTS 
(US$) 
World Food Programme 2,800,000 
TOTAL 2,800,000 
EMERGENCY TELECOMMUNICATIONS 
PARTICIPATING ORGANIZATION REQUIREMENTS 
(US$) 
World Food Programme 1,100,000 
TOTAL 1,100,000 
COMMUNICATION WITH COMMUNITIES (CWC) 
CWC 
1,242,000ppl 
6 5 4 
PEOPLE TARGETED 
NUMBER OF JRP 
ORGANIZATIONS 
336,000ppl 
Bangladeshi Host 
Communities Refugees in Camps 
Refugees in 
Host Communities 
8 99,000ppl 7,000ppl 
PARTICIPATING ORGANIZATION REQUIREMENTS 
(US$) 
Action Contre la Faim (ACF) 956,134 
Bangladesh Rural Advancement Committee 776,000 
BBC Media Action 2,623,000 
International Organization for Migration 2,777,000 
United Nations Children's Fund 3,600,000 
World Health Organization 278,000 
TOTAL 11,010,134 
COORDINATION 
PARTICIPATING ORGANIZATION REQUIREMENTS 
(US$) 
Helvetas Swiss Intercooperation 810,311 
International Organization for Migration 1,660,024 
UN Women 257,000 
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees 1,472,665 
TOTAL 4,200,000 
ANNEXES

94 
ANNEXES 
FUNDING REQUIREMENTS BY AGENCY 
PARTICIPATING ORGANIZATION REQUIREMENTS 
(US$) 
ACT Alliance / Christian Aid 7,999,714 
ACT Alliance / DanChurchAid 1,583,083 
ACT Alliance / Interchurch Organisation for Development Co-operation 3,707,878 
Action Contre la Faim (ACF) 20,926,991 
Agency for Technical Cooperation and Development (ACTED) 395,010 
Agrajattra Organization 1,813,486 
Bangladesh Rural Advancement Committee (BRAC) 47,641,125 
BBC Media Action 2,623,000 
CARE International 4,185,116 
Caritas Bangladesh 8,252,837 
CBM International 1,379,536 
COAST Trust 328,042 
Community Partners International (CPI) 100,030 
Concern Worldwide 3,900,126 
Dalit 149,883 
Danish Refugee Council (DRC) 1,770,291 
Deutsche Welthungerhilfe e.V. (German Agro Action) 395,010 
Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) 4,703,000 
Friends In Village Development Bangladesh (FIVDB) 2,805,430 
Friendship 4,575,480 
Health and Education for All (HAEFA) 757,810 
HEKS - Hilfswerk der Evangelischen Kirchen Schweiz 2,296,358 
HelpAge International UK 1,128,000 
Helvetas Swiss Intercooperation 2,951,600 
HOPE Foundation for Woman and Children of Bangladesh 500,000 
International Organization for Migration (IOM) 136,186,882 
International Rescue Committee (IRC) 1,760,500 
Mercy Malaysia 400,000 
Mukti Cox's Bazar 3,310,028 
Norwegian Refugee Council (NRC) 1,875,051 
OBAT Helpers 839,686 
OXFAM 11,515,732 
Peace Winds Japan (PWJ) 400,000 
Plan International (PI) 3,661,069 
Première Urgence Internationale (PUI) 1,875,000 
PULSE - Bangladesh 863,450 
Qatar Charity 8,575,970 
Relief International (RI) 4,936,079 
Rokeya Foundation - Rohingya Women Welfare Society 255,372 
Save the Children (SCI) 10,389,091 
Solidarités International (SI) 2,895,426 
Terre des Hommes - Lausanne 2,114,296 
United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) 113,735,776 
United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UNWomen) 3,176,538 
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) 216,045,259 
United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) 19,557,000 
World Concern Development Organization 2,715,733 
World Food Programme (WFP) 229,150,120 
World Health Organization (WHO) 11,924,707 
World Vision Bangladesh 5,433,672 
TOTAL 920,461,273

www.humanitarianresponse.info/en/operations/bangladesh 
www.facebook.com/Rohingya-Response-ISCG-Coxs-Bazar-455703051511415 
www.twitter.com/Rohingya_ISCG

96

