SOMALIA 
Photo: Max Schott/UNOCHA 
JAN 2019 
2019 
RESPONSE PLAN 
HUMANITARIAN 
JANUARY-DECEMBER 2019

02 
PART I: . . 
TOTAL POPULATION 
OF SOMALIA 
12.3M 
PEOPLE IN NEED 
4.2M 
PEOPLE TARGETED 
3.4M 
FUNDING 
REQUIREMETS (US$) 
1.08bn 
# HUMANITARIAN 
PARTNERS 
328 
26,000 
126,000 
92,000 
117,000 
198,000 
233,000 
60,000 
155,000 
144,000 
78,000
51,000 
497,000 
48,000 
207,000 
40,000 
165,000 
2.6 million 
272,000 
139,000 Total IDPs 
GUL F O F ADEN 
I NDI AN OCE AN 
KENYA 
YEMEN 
DJIBOUTI 
ETHIOPIA 
Djibouti 
Mogadishu 
Number of IDPs by region 
Acute food insecurity phase 
(Aug - Dec 2018 Projection)1 
Stressed (Phase 2) 
Crisis (Phase 3) 
Emergency (Phase 4) 
IDPs population by 
Phase 
977,000 in Stress 
777,000 in Crisis 
107,000 in Emergency 
Mininal (Phase 1) 
Catastrophe (Phase 5 16,000 in Catastrophe 
- 
The boundaries and names shown and the designations used on the maps in this document do not imply ocial endorsement or acceptance by the United Nations. 
1. The integrated food security phase classication (IPC) is a set of tools and procedures to classify the severity of food insecurity using a widely accepted ve-phase scale. At the area 
level, it divides areas into the following phases: IPC Phase 1=Minimal; Phase 2=Stress; Phase 3=Crisis; Phase 4=Emergency; and Phase 5 = Famine. data source: FAO- FSNAU, 
FEWSNET 
2. IDPs data source: UNHCR - PRMN

03 
PART I: . TABLE OF CONTENT 
PART I: COUNTRY STRATEGY 
Foreword by the Humanitarian Coordinator .................... 4 
The humanitarian response plan at a glance ................... 5 
Overview of the crisis .......................................................... 6 
2018 Humanitarian Achievements ....................................... 9 
Strategic objectives ............................................................ 10 
Response strategy .............................................................. 11 
Operational capacity .......................................................... 19 
Humanitarian access .......................................................... 20 
Response monitoring ......................................................... 22 
Summary of needs, targets & requirements ................... 23 
PART II: OPERATIONAL; RESPONSE PLANS 
Camp Coordination and Camp Management .................. 25 
Education ............................................................................. 27 
Enabling Programmes ....................................................... 29 
Food Security ................................................................ 30 
Health ........................................................................... 32 
Nutrition ........................................................................... 34 
Protection ................................................................................ 36 
Shelter ...................................................................................... 38 
Water, Sanitation and Hygiene ............................................. 40 
Multi-Sectoral Assistance ...................................................... 42 
Refugee Response Plan ......................................................... 43 
PART III: ANNEXES 
Acroynms ........................................................................... 46 
Participating organisations & funding requirements .... 47 
Objectives, indicators & targets ....................................... 49 
Planning figures .................................................................. 58 
Collective outcomes ........................................................... 60 
References ........................................................................... 64 
What if? ................................................................................... 66 
Guide to Giving ..................................................................... 67

04 
PART I: Foreword by the humanitarian coordinator 
FOREWORD BY 
THE HUMANITARIAN 
COORDINATOR 
Although we are looking back on our successful fight against the 
looming famine during the 2016-2017 season, the evolution of 
the humanitarian situation in the last six months demonstrates 
the continued unpredictable and volatile context in Somalia. 
While the unexpectedly plentiful Gu rainy season (April-June) 
led to an overall improvement in the food security outlook 
country-wide, it also brought severe flooding across vast 
areas of southern and central Somalia. In May, cyclone Sagar 
devastated parts of Somaliland and Puntland, compounding 
humanitarian needs generated by the dispute in Sool and 
Sanaag. Moreover, contrary to initially positive projections, the 
Deyr rainy season (October-December 2018) did not perform 
as expected, especially in Puntland and Somaliland. New and 
protracted armed conflicts, insecurity and erratic weather have 
continued to push Somali civilians away from their homes 
and into already overfull towns and cities. Consequently, the 
number of internally displaced persons (IDPs) has reached a 
record 2.6 million, one of the largest IDP populations in the 
world. 
Notwithstanding these challenges, it is important to 
also acknowledge the achievements of the humanitarian 
community in 2018. With timely and generous support from 
donors, it has been possible to effectively deliver humanitarian 
aid, currently reaching almost 3 million of the most vulnerable 
people, with interventions totalling $840.3 million against the 
2018 Humanitarian Response Plan (HRP). Due to sustained 
humanitarian assistance and favourable rains in the first half of 
2018, the number of severely food-insecure people decreased 
by 54 per cent between 2017 and 2018, from 3.3 to 1.5 million. 
The Humanitarian Country Team’s Centrality of Protection 
(CoP) Strategy has increasingly refined our operations in 
Somalia to reach the furthest behind and most deprived. 
For 2019, we have further operationalised the CoP Strategy 
and all projects in the HRP are specifically designed to 
protect marginalized groups from the dire consequences of 
discrimination and abuse. 
To ensure the credibility of our response plan and to reduce 
funding gaps, we refined humanitarian needs and related 
targets for the 2019 Humanitarian Programme Cycle by 
including around 60 per cent of the caseload in stress 
situations (IPC 2) under the Humanitarian Needs Overview 
and Response Plan. This will facilitate the gradual handover of 
food insecure people at stress level to resilience and recovery 
actors. Consequently, the number of people considered to be 
in need of humanitarian assistance in 2019 reduced by 32 per 
cent (from 6.2 to 4.2 million people) and the number of people 
targeted by 37 percent (from 5.4 to 3.4 million people). The 
financial requirement for the 2019 HRP stands at $1.08 billion, 
a reduction of $465 million compared to last year. 
While this year’s HRP remains focused on the immediate needs 
of the most vulnerable people (e.g. IDPs, host communities, 
returnees and refugees from neighbouring countries), the 
new approach enhances opportunities for development actors 
to strengthen the resilience of Somalis by implementing 
programmes that offer long-lasting, durable solutions. This 
approach has been warmly welcomed by the Government and 
is fully consistent with the Resilience and Recovery Framework 
as well as the National Development Plan. 
With the reduction in the number of people targeted and 
overall budget, the complementarity between humanitarian 
and development assistance becomes more important than 
ever. Development actors must prioritise programmes to 
tackle structural and chronic development challenges in 
Somalia. Once again, the principles underlying the Centrality 
of Protection Strategy to target the most left behind will 
guide us here. The Government-led Recovery and Resilience 
Framework creates the synergies needed to reduce needs and 
attain the Collective Outcomes. 
With the support of the Government of Somalia, the 
international community and the tireless work of the 
humanitarian and development communities in Somalia we 
can move forward confidently on an integrated approach, 
that results in addressing underlying causes to long standing 
humanitarian issues. At the same time, we are hereby presenting 
a Humanitarian Response Plan that reflects this two-track 
approach and does justice to the still significant humanitarian 
live-saving needs in Somalia. I sincerely thank our partners 
for all the good work done so far: donors for their continued 
support, and humanitarian actors for their determined effort to 
always improve their effectiveness. We must continue working 
to alleviate the suffering of the most vulnerable communities 
in Somalia, while laying the foundation for a more peaceful 
and sustainable country. 
Peter de Clerq 
Humanitarian Coordinator

05 
PART I: The Humanitarian Response Plan at a glance 
THE HUMANITARIAN RESPONSE PLAN 
AT A GLANCE 
NUMBER OF PARTNERS 
328 
PEOPLE TARGETED 
3.4M 
INTERNALLY DISPLACED PERSONS 
2M 
HOST COMMUNITIES 
1.3M 
REFUGEES/ ASYLUM SEEKERS 
39K 
REFUGEES RETURNEES 
41.5K 
PEOPLE IN NEED 
4.2M 
PEOPLE TARGET 
3.4M 
REQUIREMENTS (US$) 
1.08BN 
STRATEgIC OBJECTIvE 1 S T R A T E gIC OBJECTIvE 2 
STRATEgIC OBJECTIvE 3 S T R A T E gIC OBJECTIvE 4 
Life-saving Nutrition 
Protection Resilience 
Reduce acute humanitarian needs and 
excess mortality among the most 
vulnerable by providing life-saving and 
sustaining integrated assistance. 
Ensure protection of affected populations, 
including those living in hard-to-reach 
areas and IDP settlements, through 
protection promoting assistance that 
targets the most vulnerable and people at 
risk of exclusion. 
Reduce emergency levels of acute 
malnutrition by strengthening 
nutrition-sensitive and integrated 
multi-sectorial programming. 
Increase resilience capacity of at risk 
communities and promote complementary 
interventions of development partners in 
social services. 
Bari 
Bay 
Mudug 
Sool 
Gedo 
Sanaag 
Hiraan
Galgaduud 
Lower 
Juba 
Nugaal 
Bakool 
Togdheer 
Awdal
Lower 
Shabelle 
Woqooyi 
Galbeed 
Middle Juba 
Middle 
Shabelle 
Banadir 
Mogadishu 
Greater than 720 
300,000 
50,000

06 
PART I: Overview of the crisis 
The crisis impacts people throughout Somalia, in 
particular the displaced and host communities 
People in need are located throughout all 18 regions of 
Somalia,1accounting for up to 70 per cent of the population in 
some regions. Nearly 50 per cent of all people in need live in 
five regions: Banadir (721,000), Bay (370,000), Lower Shabelle 
(370,000), Awdal (306,000) and Hiraan (279,000). Overall, 
2.6 million people have been internally displaced by armed 
conflict, insecurity and/or drought, 80 per cent of whom are 
living in urban areas. The significant increase of the population 
in urban centres has intensified pressure on the already limited 
services, such as health, education and housing. Somalia 
also hosts 39,000 refugees and asylum-seekers, mainly from 
Ethiopia (19,600) and Yemen (12,100). Some 92,000 Somali 
refugees are projected to return to the country in 2019, largely 
coming from Kenya and Yemen. Among the host communities, 
around 1.5 million people suffer from the protracted impact of 
OVERVIEW OF 
THE CRISIS 
The humanitarian crisis in Somalia is among the most complex and long-standing 
in the world. Armed conflict and widespread violence, as well as recurrent climatic 
shocks, perpetuate high levels of humanitarian needs and protection concerns. 
While above-average rains in the first part of 2018 improved food security, the 
humanitarian situation remains fragile and prone to future climatic shocks. In total, 
an estimated 4.2 million people1, one third of the total population in Somalia, 
require humanitarian assistance and protection. 
Drought declared by 
governments of Somaliland 
and Puntland. 
Feb 2016 
Sep 2016 
Results of post-Gu 
assessment: 1.1 million 
people in IPC 3 or above, 
an increase of nearly 33% 
compared to post-Gu 2015 
GAM: 14.3%; SAM: 2.9%. 
SOMALIA CRISIS TIMELINE 2016 - 2018 
Operational Plan for Famine 
Prevention launched, requesting 
$825M to target 5.5 million people 
over a six-month period. 
President of the Federal 
Government of Somalia declares 
the drought a national disaster. 
Feb 2017 
The graph shows the evolution of number of indicators in alarm phase across Somalia between January 2016 and September 2018 as per the Early-warning Early-action 
dashboard of FSNAU. In this period, the lowest value was recorded in January 2016 (99 indicators) and the highest in March 2017 (386 indicators). In September 2018, 
130 indicators were in alarm phase. 
Jan 2017 
HRP launched, with a 
financial request of $864 
million to target 3.9 million 
people out of 5 million in 
need. 
13,900 cumulative cases of 
AWD/cholera (week 44), 
with 496 deaths (3.56% 
CFR). 
Nov 2016 
Famine alert issued. 
Harvests are among the 
lowest recorded, 60-70% 
below the five-year average. 
Jan 2017 
Jan 2016 
An estimated 1.1 million 
IDPs are in Somalia from 
conflict and previous 
droughts. 
HRP launched, with a 
financial request of $885 
million to target 3.5 million 
people out of 4.9 million in 
need. 
May 2017 
Revised HRP launched 
to respond to ongoing 
drought, consolidating HRP 
and Operational Plan for 
Famine Prevention. Total 
financial requirement $1.5 
billion to target 5.4 million 
people.

07 
PART I: Overview of the crisis 
decades of violence, recurrent climatic shocks and governance 
challenges. In both rural and urban areas, there is an ongoing 
struggle over limited resources and access to aid, often leading 
to tensions between host communities and displaced people. 
The most vulnerable groups, who are exposed to the highest 
risks and are consistently socially excluded, include women, 
children, the elderly, child- and female-headed households, 
the physically and mentally disabled, people living in conflict 
zones, and marginalised clans2. Such groups are not mutually 
exclusive, compounding the vulnerability of those who belong 
to more than one. Displaced women, children and members 
of marginalised clans are especially vulnerable due to family 
separations and/or the absence of community networks. 
Displacement and protection risks are key drivers of 
humanitarian needs 
Somalia has one of the largest internally displaced population 
(IDP) in the world, with an estimated 2.6 million IDPs3. There 
are 2,000 settlements across all 18 regions of Somalia, with most 
IDPs living in Lower Shabelle and Banadir (497,000 people), as 
well as in Bay region (272,000 people)4. With a strong rural-tourban 
trend – around 2.2 out of the total 2.6 million IDPs live 
in settlements in urban and peri-urban areas – displacement 
has led to an increase in the population in the cities hosting 
the highest numbers of IDPs: Mogadishu, Baidoa, Galkackyo 
and Kismayo. Conflict or fear of conflict, as well as drought, 
are the main reasons for the recent internal displacements 
in Somalia, accounting for 22 per cent of the movements, 
respectivelly. Lack of livelihood opportunities (16 per cent), 
and evictions (5 per cent) are the other two main drivers of 
displacement5. Multiple population movement cycles since 
1991 has characterised the complex and protracted situation6. 
At least 45 per cent of IDPs have been displaced for longer than 
five years, 42 per cent for one to three years and 13 per cent 
for less than one year. The long-term nature of displacement 
indicates the need for durable solutions for this group – 90 per 
cent of the IDPs interviewed have indicated that they intend 
to remain in their current location, and integrate locally, rather 
than return to their area of origin. 
The rising trend of forced evictions, influenced by the increasing 
urban population density, growing property prices and a lack 
of tenure security or regulatory frameworks, constitutes a 
significant and prevalent protection threat for IDPs and poor 
urban families. IDPs are exposed to a higher risk of forced 
eviction as a result of exposure to unequal power dynamics and 
exploitative relationships with land owners, through informal 
settlement managers (frequently called gatekeepers). Between 
January and October 2018, over 234,000 persons were evicted 
throughout Somalia, representing a 40 per cent increase 
compared to the same period in 20177. 
Somalia has signed the African Union Convention for the 
Protection and Assistance of Internally Displaced Persons in 
Africa (Kampala Convention)8. While the procedures for 
depositing the signed Convention with the African Union 
(AU) are in progress, they have not yet been finalised. However, 
78,426 cumulative cases of 
AWD/cholera (week 44) 
with 1159 deaths (1.48% 
CFR). 
Nov 2017 
Results of post-Gu 
assessment: 3.4 million 
people in IPC 3 or above, an 
increase of 209% compared 
to post-Gu 2016. 
GAM: 17.4%; SAM: 3.2% 
Sep 2017 
Dec 2017 
HRP with a financial 
request of $1.5 billion to 
target 5.4 million people out 
of 6.2 million in need. 
Total IDP figure revised 
to 2.6 million based on 
additional data and analysis. 
Jan 2018 
Apr 2018 
Flash and riverine flooding 
affect 830,000 people, 
temporarily displacing 
229,000. 
Cyclone Sagar affects 
228,000 people in 
Somaliland and Puntland. 
May 2018 
Sep 2018 
Results of post-Gu 
assessment 1.56 million 
people in IPC 3 or above, a 
reduction of 54% compared 
to post-Gu 2017. 
GAM: 13.8%; SAM: 2.2%. 
Early -warning Early-action dashboard since Jan 2016 (Source FSNAU): a multi-partner effort mandated by the Somalia Humanitarian Country Team (HCT) to facilitate decision 
making for early action based on the identification and monitoring of a consistent set of key early warning indicators. These are Climate (rainfall, vegetation coverage/NDVI and river 
levels and price of water); Market (cereal prices, livestock prices, Wage Labor and Terms of Trade); Health (Measles, AWD, Polio and Malaria); Nutrition (New admission to feeding/ 
treatment centers/GAM) and Population displacement. 
Over 35,000 people 
forcefully evicted from 
Mogadishu IDP settlements. 
Dec 2017 
Oct 2017 
Massive blast, caused by a 
vehicle-borne IED, kills at 
least 587 people and injures 
hundreds in Mogadishu. 
An additional 1 million 
people displaced during 
the 2017 drought, bringing 
the total IDP figure to 2.1 
million.

08 
PART I: Overview of the crisis 
several policy frameworks on displacement exist at the regional 
level. The development of a Federal Policy is ongoing and 
commitments have been made to draft national guidelines to 
regulate evictions. 
Almost 60 per cent of people in need are children who 
face specific protection threats 
The protection crisis in Somalia exposes children to significant 
risks. Between January and September 2018, 3,566 children 
(2,997 boys and 569 girls) were reported to be survivors of grave 
violations committed by parties to the conflict9. According 
to the Country Task Force on Monitoring and Reporting 
(CTFMR), 1,811 children (including 56 girls) were recruited 
by armed groups between January and September 2018, an 
increase of 15 per cent compared to 2017, when 1,568 children 
were abducted10. 
Access to education continues to be impeded, with 64 schools 
attacked and 21 forced to close in 201811. Many teachers that 
decline to adopt the curriculum of non-state armed actors are 
threatened and, on some occasions, detained. Furthermore, 
children constitute approximately one million, or 38 per cent, 
of the 2.6 million IDPs, exposing them to additional protection 
risks such as family separation, forced child labour and sexual 
exploitation and abuse. Approximately 10 per cent of reported 
incidents of violation of child rights involve sexual violence12. 
Despite improvements in food security, the 
humanitarian situation remains characterised by 
fragility 
Due to the above-average rains in the first half of 2018 and 
sustained humanitarian assistance, the number of people 
facing severe food insecurity (IPC Phase 3 and above) has 
decreased by 52 per cent from 3.1 million in September 2017 
to 1.5 million in September 2018. However, the IPC Phase 2 
caseload remained virtually unchanged, with a reduction of 
only 0.6 per cent. Due to the mid-2018 Gu rainy season, total 
cereal production exceeded the long-term average (1995-2017) 
by approximately 17 per cent and is 58 per cent higher than the 
five-year average (2013-17)13. Favourable rainfall between April 
and June 2018 also improved pasture and water availability for 
livestock and bolstered market conditions in some areas. 
Notwithstanding the relative improvement in food security 
outcomes since the end of the 2016/17 drought, similar gains 
were not observed with respect to malnutrition, which is 
influenced by several factors, including healthcare, clean water, 
proper sanitation and good hygiene practices. Malnutrition 
rates across Somalia remain very high and, in 2019, nearly 
1 million children will be acutely malnourished, including 
more than 177,000 children suffering from severe acute 
malnutrition14. 
One in seven Somali children dies before the age of five15. 
Malnutrition, disease outbreaks, low immunisation coverage of 
only 43 per cent and limited healthcare for those living under 
the most vulnerable circumstances are the main drivers of 
mortality. The average prevalence of Global Acute Malnutrition 
(GAM) is at 14 per cent, considered worrying. Furthermore, 
many parts of Somalia remain above the emergency threshold 
of 15 per cent. In particular, IDP settlements in urban areas 
such as Bossaso, Baidoa, Doloow, Gaalkacyo, Garowe, 
Mogadishu and Qardho show high levels of GAM, surpassing 
the emergency threshold of 15 per cent. 
Overall, despite considerable improvements, humanitarian 
needs in Somalia remain above the levels seen prior to the 2017 
drought crisis, and recent gains can easily be reversed. Acute 
needs persist, particularly among farmers and pastoralists who 
have experienced drought- or flood-related crop or livestock 
losses, as well as among IDPs who lost their livelihoods through 
displacement. 
Moreover, some of the food security improvements that 
followed above-average Gu rains (April-June 2018) are now 
being reversed due to below-average Deyr rains in the last 
quarter of 2018. This is expected to have a direct impact on 
the upcoming Jilaal dry season (January-March 2019), which 
could be particularly harsh, especially in the north-east of the 
country16. 
Early and timely humanitarian assistance coupled with 
substantial investments in sustainable developments solutions 
and resilience building efforts are critical to mitigating the risk 
of recurrent shocks, which will in turn reduces humanitarian 
needs in Somalia. 
KEY ISSUES 
Life-threatening needs among 
the displaced and other crisis 
affected communities 
Protection risks due to 
exposure to armed conflict, 
violence, disasters and climatic 
change 
Needs of hard-to-reach 
populations, including access 
Scarce livelihood opportunities 
and weakened resilience

09 
PART I: 2018 humanitarian achie vements 
2018 HUMANITARIAN 
ACHIEVEMENTS 
CCCM 
715 IDP sites with established 
CCCM mechanisms. 
665,800 displaced people with 
access to information about 
humanitarian services 
EDUCATION 
191,000 school children 
reached with Education in 
Emergencies Assistance 
FOOD SECURITY 
2 million people assisted per 
month with activities that improved 
access to food and SafetyNet 
(January-October 2018) 
HEALTH 
17 Integrated Emergency 
Response Teams were 
established reaching 
3.8M doses of OCv given to 
over 1.5 M individuals 
LOGISTICS 
455MT of humanitarian 
relief items transported by air 
to 14 destinations on behalf of 
16 partners and the Federal 
government 
NUTRITION 
548,400 children under 
age 5 and pregnant and 
breastfeeding women treated 
for malnutrition 
(January-November 2018) 
PROTECTION 
Over 150,000 girls, 
boys, women and men reached 
per month with protection services 
andcommunity-based activities 
SHELTER 
Over 275,000 IDPs assisted 
with NFIs and 184,000 IDPs 
with Emergency Shelter kits 
(January-November 2018) 
WASH 
Over 400,000 people assisted 
with temporary access to safe 
water per month

10 
PART I: Strate gic Objecti ves 
STRATEGIC 
OBJECTIVES 
Guided by the Humanitarian Country Team Centrality of Protection Strategy 
2018-2019, the humanitarian operation in 2019 will focus on four core strategic 
objectives: Providing life-saving assistance, nutrition, protection and resilience 
support to the most vulnerable. 
1 Life-saving: 
Reduce acute 
humanitarian 
needs and 
excess mortality 
among the most 
vulnerable by providing 
life-saving and sustaining 
integrated assistance. 
2 Nutrition: 
Reduce 
emergency 
levels of acute 
malnutrition 
by strengthening 
nutrition-sensitive and 
integrated, multi-sectoral 
programming. 
3 Protection: 
Ensure 
protection 
of affected 
populations, 
including those living in 
hard-to-reach areas and 
IDP settlements, through 
protection promoting 
assistance that targets 
the most vulnerable 
and people at risk of 
exclusion. 
4 Resilience: 
Increase 
resilience 
capacity 
of at risk 
communities and 
promote complementary 
interventions of 
development partners in 
social services. 
Humanitarian programming 
prioritises assistance to 
people with acute needs and 
in life-threating situations, 
including IDPs, refugees, 
refugee returnees and host 
communities, and those 
suffering from severe food 
insecurity (IPC Phase 3 and 
above) to minimise excess 
morbidity and mortality, 
especially among children. 
The response will encompass 
access to quality basic 
services, such as schools, 
nutrition centres and WASH 
facilities, among others. As 
in previous years, the 2019 
plan will continue to focus 
on an integrated approach, 
with projects and activities 
concurrently tackling 
multiple sectoral issues. 
Humanitarian actors will 
collaboratively work towards 
the sustainable reduction of 
emergency levels of acute 
malnutrition. Focus will be 
directed towards vulnerable 
areas with prevalence of 
GAM surpassing emergency 
thresholds and where these 
rates persistently spike: 
IDP settlements, rural 
communities and areas 
which are prone to climatic 
shocks and are affected by 
conflict. Furthermore, efforts 
will be channeled through 
a response which integrates 
nutrition services with those 
of other sectors, including 
health, food security and 
WASH. 
Humanitarian action will 
be guided through the 
Centrality of Protection 
strategy in order to i) 
identify and address 
systematic risks of exclusion 
and discrimination, ii) 
address critical protection 
concerns in connection with 
increasing displacement 
towards IDP settlements and 
collective-centres, especially 
child protection and Gender- 
Based Violence (GBV), and 
iii) enhance the protection 
of communities in conflict 
zones, through engagement 
of communities in their selfprotection, 
targeted delivery 
of assistance, and robust 
engagement with parties to 
the conflict. 
While the emphasis of the 
HRP is life-saving assistance, 
it will also focus on 
resilience-building at the 
community level with shortterm 
interventions aimed at 
preventing a deterioration 
of their situation and higher 
severity of needs. Populations 
classified in IPC Phase 
2 will be prioritised. To 
reduce humanitarian needs, 
risks and vulnerabilities in 
the medium to longer term, 
synergies and complementarities 
with development, 
recovery and resilience 
initiatives, such as the United 
Nations Strategic Framework 
(UNSF), the Resilience and 
Recovery Framework (RRF) 
and the National Development 
Plan (NDP), will 
be further advanced to the 
extent possible.

11 
PART I: Response strate gy 
RESPONSE 
STRATEGY 
With protection at the centre of all humanitarian interventions, the response 
strategy targets 3.4 million people, or 81 per cent of the 4.2 million people in need 
of humanitarian assistance. Humanitarian partners will assist the most vulnerable 
people with urgent life-saving aid, ensuring that acute needs are met, while 
increasingly and pointedly reaching out to development and resilience actors to 
facilitate synergies and complementary action, to ultimately reduce humanitarian 
needs. To implement the HRP, $1.08 billion is required. 
This plan is based on the humanitarian needs as of 
November 2018 and will be adjusted as required 
Humanitarian needs in Somalia are largely driven by 
conflict, climatic shocks and underlying factors such as weak 
governance and limited access to basic services. These needs 
are further compounded by marginalisation and inequality. 
Conflict dynamics, up-coming elections and irregular 
weather patterns influence the volatile context in Somalia, 
making reliable projections of humanitarian needs difficult. 
Therefore, the HRP, and the financial requirements for its 
implementation, are based on the needs as identified in the 
2019 Humanitarian Needs Overview (HNO). Possible needs 
related to future climatic shocks, including possible poor 
rainy seasons, new or escalating armed conflict, or epidemic 
outbreaks are not considered in this strategy. The HRP and 
its financial requirements will be adjusted in response to new 
shocks and the consequent changes in humanitarian needs. 
This plan targets 3.4 million people - 81 per cent of 4.2 
million people in need 
The number of people targeted in the HRP is determined taking 
into consideration available response capacity, insecurity in 
large parts of Somalia and the consequent access constraints. 
Considering these planning assumptions, the response targets 
3.4 million people (including 2 million children) or 81 per 
cent of the 4.2 million people in need. The 4.2 million people 
include 2.6 million IDPs (of whom 79 per cent are targeted); 
39,000 refugees and asylum-seekers (100 per cent targeted); 
92,000 refugee returnees (of whom 45 per cent are targeted) 
and 1.5 million host communities (of whom 93 per cent are 
targeted). People in all 18 regions of Somalia will be assisted, 
with the proportion of people in need targeted across regions 
ranging from 65 per cent to 92 per cent. Continued extension 
of assistance to those in the hard-to-reach areas remains a 
priority. Humanitarian actors aim to provide assistance as close 
to the affected people as possible, including in rural and remote 
areas, to mitigate the risks associated with displacement. 
PROPORTION OF PEOPLE TARGETED COMPARED TO PEOPLE IN NEED BY REGION 
0 
100K 
200K 
300K 
400K 
500K 
600K 
700K 
800K 
Lower 
Juba 
Middle 
Juba 
Lower Gedo 
Shabelle 
Middle Banadir Bakool Bay 
Shabelle 
Woqooyi Togdheer Sanaag Sool Bari Nugaal Mudug Galgaduud Hiraan 
Galbeed 
Awdal 
76% 82% 
67% 90% 
70% 
89% 
98% 
77% 76% 
87% 
88% 
80% 
92% 
79% 80% 
89% 
80% 
81% 
People in need 
People targeted

12 
PART I: Response strate gy 
A more focused humanitarian response plan requires 
implementation of resilience and development 
frameworks 
For the present HRP, the humanitarian community in Somalia 
has decided to apply a more focused definition of humanitarian 
needs, based on specific vulnerability criteria17. New boundaries 
have been set on what is considered humanitarian needs and 
related targets, both at the sectoral and intersectoral levels18. 
Therefore, the Humanitarian Country Team (HCT) has also 
agreed to revise the methodology to calculate the total number 
of people in need (PiN) of humanitarian assistance for 201919, 
which has led to a 32 per cent reduction in the overall PiN - 
from 6.2 million people in 2018 to 4.2 million in 2019 - and a 
37 per cent reduction in the number of people targeted in the 
2019 HRP. Consequently, the funding requirements for 2019 
have also reduced from $1.5 to $1.1 billion, a decrease of nearly 
30 per cent compared to 2018. 
The new approach facilitates financial transparency and 
accountability across the HRP and other development or 
resilience plans, such as the National Development Plan (NDP), 
the UN Strategic Framework (UNSF) or the Recovery and 
Resilience Framework (RRF). This prioritisation also requires 
– and is based on the assumption - that development partners 
and donors will prioritise programmes to tackle structural and 
chronic development challenges in Somalia. Development and 
resilience actors, as well as donors have been involved in the 
discussions to set the new boundaries since the onset of the 
Humanitarian Programme Cycle process. 
With the reduced funding requirements and given that the 
HRP focus on immediate humanitarian needs, development 
partners and donors are expected to prioritise programming 
for social service delivery, capacity development and livelihood 
support, in addition to programming for governance and 
security objectives. Beyond the Somalia Development and 
Reconstruction Facility (SDRF) or other aid mechanisms, 
the provision of aid should be extended to include privatepublic 
partnerships and other approaches that are consistent 
with the Federal Government of Somalia’s RRF. The UN is 
working to strengthen its resilience-based programming 
through the elaboration of a Resilience Platform, in support of 
RRF priorities, to address the underlying causes of recurrent 
humanitarian crises. 
People with acute needs and 
in life-threatening situations 
Targeted People 
1.5 million people facing severe food 
insecurity (IPC 3 or worse), 647,000 
children suffering from moderate 
(470,000) and severe (177,000) acute 
malnutrition will be prioritised with 
multi-sectoral assistance* 
Vulnerable people facing 
protection concerns and survivors 
of human rights violations 
Groups at risk of violence, exploitation, 
abuse and neglect, exclusion and 
discrimination, largely represented by 
women, children - especially girls-, 
the elderly, child- and female-headed 
households, people with disabilities, 
marginalised clans and IDPs. 
People living in hard-to-reach 
areas 
Rural areas and some urban centres 
that are insecure and/or controlled 
by non-state armed actors, and 
where families flee from the 
forced recruitment of children 
People whose livelihoods are 
particularly fragile after 
ongoing armed conflict 
and violence, and 
recurrent climatic shocks 
People living in drought and 
flood-prone areas, as well those in 
conflict zones, whose ability to absorb 
impact of such incidents were 
undermined by the last crises. 
* In addition, Jubaland state, South West state, Hiraan region of Hirshabelle state and Banadir region, all with significant numbers of severely food insecure people (IPC phase 3 
and above), many of which are IDPs, are prioritised for response. IDP settlements in urban areas such as Mogadishu, Baidoa, Garowe, Bossaso and Doolow are prioritised 
due to high levels of acute malnutrition, which surpass the emergency threshold of 15 per cent in all locations. 
To reach the most vulnerable people 
and those with the most severe needs, 
four population groups, which may 
overlap, will be prioritised in the response 
Comparing 2018 and 2019, the total number of 
people in need reduced by 32 per cent, given the 
revised definition of humanitarian needs as well as 
an improved humanitarian context. Total number 
of people targeted in the HRP reduced by 37 per 
cent. Both the people in need figures and targeted 
population will be regularly reviewed and refined, 
considering the evolving situation in the country. 

13 
PART I: Response strate gy 
Outlook – streamlining of future planning 
processes: with a view to ensure more efficient 
use of resources and sustainable reduction of 
needs, humanitarian and development actors 
continue to streamline their planning processes 
and may consider aligning respective multi-year 
plans. This may include multi-year needs 
projections and targets with gradual decrease of 
humanitarian needs for each year. The HCT will 
discuss options for multi-year HRP in 2019. 
Humanitarian, Resilience and Development plans and frameworks in Somalia 
National Development Plan 2017-2019 (NDP): The NDP 
is the first national level strategic plan crafted by the Federal 
Government of Somalia (FGS) in over 30 years. The NDP 
outlines Somalia’s short- to medium-term development 
priorities and implementation mechanisms. The subsequent 
NDP is currently being drafted and will cover the period 2020- 
2024. 
UN Strategic Framework 2017-2020 (UNSF): The UNSF is a 
multi-year strategic plan to guide the UN’s work and articulates 
the UN’s collective strategy, commitments and actions in 
support of the Somali government’s development priorities 
as articulated in the NDP and in achieving the Sustainable 
Development Goals. The subsequent UNSF will be aligned to 
the timeframe of the new NDP. 
Humanitarian Response Plan 2019 (HRP): Based on needs identified in the Humanitarian Needs Overview (HNO), 
humanitarian actors have developed the HRP with targets and financial requirements per cluster. The subsequent HRP will 
further consider the Collective Outcomes, such as multi-year needs and targets projections. 
Recovery and Resilience Framework 2019-2021 (RRF): Developed under the leadership of the FGS and based on the 
needs identified in the Drought Impact Needs Assessment (DINA), the RRF aims to bring a holistic, systematic approach to 
the recovery and resilience building process of Somalia. The RRF’s components are closely aligned with NDP’s resilienceoriented 
priorities. The RRF is also key in realising the Collective Outcomes. 
Collective Outcomes 2019-2022 (COs): At the end of 2017, humanitarian and development partners proposed four COs 
to reduce needs, risks and vulnerabilities and increase resilience by 2022. The COs were designed to ensure alignment and 
complementarity between the RRF, UNSF, NDP and the HRP and represent key areas that require combined humanitarian 
and development. 
2017 
2018 
2019 
2020 
2021 
2022 
Humanitarian coordina..on architecture: 
HCT, ICCG, Clusters,... 
Development coordina..on architecture: 
SDRF, UNCT, PWG,... 
HRP 2019 
Collec..ve Outcomes 2019-2022 
RRF 2019-2021 
NDP 2017-2019 
UNSF 2017-2020 
HRP 2017 HRP 2018 
Limitations on government capacity to provide basic 
social services requires continued humanitarian action 
until such activities are gradually handed over to 
development, durable solution and resilience actors 
While the HRP will concentrate efforts on core live-saving 
activities and protection, some interventions still include 
delivery of basic services and livelihood support. In line 
with the ‘New Way of Working’, humanitarian partners will 
continue to reach out to development and resilience actors, 
donors and the government to address the underlying causes 
of humanitarian needs and gradually transition the delivery of 
basic social services to such actors. 
Building long-term resilience and addressing displacement 
in a context of rapid urbanisation requires efforts that go 
beyond humanitarian response. To facilitate collaboration 
with development and stability actors on durable solutions to 
displacement and resilience-building, all projects within the 
HRP have applied a Resilience/Durable Solution filters to show 
whether and how they could link into resilience building or 
durable solutions processes. Organisations that selected this 

14 
PART I: Response strate gy 
option, were asked to provide further information, responding 
to the questions in the box in the bottom of the page. 
Of the 352 projects under the 2019 HRP, 82 per cent or 289 
projects were self-identified as somehow relevant to resilience 
building or durable solutions20. While not primarily focused 
on resilience and durable solutions, these projects - with an 
estimated value of over 50 per cent of the HRP - may provide 
the potential for an increased impact, as work continues in 
2019 to foster coordination and sequencing of humanitarian 
and development interventions. 
Finding durable solutions is a long-term and complex 
process that gradually enables displaced persons to 
rebuild their lives and become self-reliant through 
sustainable economic and social re-integration into 
society. This can take place either at the location of 
displacement, the place of origin or elsewhere in the 
country. Where the environment is sufficiently safe 
and stable, and the long-term settlement of displaced 
population is possible, humanitarian assistance can 
contribute to such processes. 
In 2019, humanitarian actors will continue to support the 
Durable Solutions Initiative (DSI)21, aiming at strengthening 
ability of local government authorities to take over service 
delivery, plan across sectors, establish service referral 
mechanisms and reinforce formal structures in settlements. 
In this sense, humanitarian actors will also engage with 
development and resilience actors in 2019, by considering 
existing community-based planning processes and local 
government plans, as adequate22. 
Furthermore, humanitarian and development partners have 
developed at the end of 2017 four Collective Outcomes (CO). 
These CO may be considered as the framework for a future 
multi-year response plan with multi-year needs projections, 
including the gradual decrease in annual estimates of 
humanitarian needs. All projects included in the HRP indicated 
that they are contributing to achieving the CO (see annexes for 
detailed information on the CO). 
The Centrality of Protection is at the centre of the HRP 
The Somalia Humanitarian Country Team’s Centrality of 
Protection (CoP) Strategy 2018-2019 is at the centre of the 2019 
Humanitarian Programme Cycle in Somalia. This includes 
needs analysis from a protection lense (as reflected in the 
HNO), response planning, project design and implementation. 
All 352 projects in the HRP have been vetted against the CoP 
to identify the main risks faced by the targeted population 
and outline the appropriate prevention/mitgation measures. 
Organisations uploading projects in the Project Module for 
the Somalia HRP 2019, were asked to respond to the questions 
in the box below, to explain which prevention/mitigation 
measures they planned to put in place through their project to 
address the protection risks identified. 
The CoP will continue to be central in project monitoring and 
communications with affected people. As also highlighted in 
the CoP strategy (see next page box), one of the key priorities 
for 2019 will be to enhance the protection of communities in 
conflict zones, which also includes protecting education and 
health facilities against attacks, including the occupation of 
such facilities for non-intended purpose. 
... Durable Solutions & Resilience ... Centrality of Protection 
Explain if the protection environment is suciently safe or stable to 
enable durable solutions/resilience 
Is a sustainability/handover component built into the project? 
Is the project linked to government/community systems, or to longerterm 
interventions? 
Will the entitlement of beneciaries to services/utilities provided be 
legally recognized? 
Identify the main risks facing the targeted population, as related to 
the lenses below and the appropriate prevention/mitigation 
measures in your project 
Lens 1: Preventing risks of exclusion based on displacement 
Lens 2: Mitigating the impact of armed conict and violence 
Lens 3: Preventing risks of exclusion based on gender and age 
ALL PROJECTS HAVE BEEN ANALYZED AGAINST ... 
Decrease the number of 
people in acute food 
insecurity and malnutrion 
rates 
Collec..ve Outcome 1 
26 % 
29 % 39% 
6 % 
352 
Projects 
Reduce the risks and 
vulnerabili..es, and build 
resilience of displaced and 
host communi..es to reach 
durable solu..ons 
Increase the number of 
people with equitable 
access to basic social 
services 
Reduce the propo..on of 
popula..on affected by 
climate-induced hazards 
Collec..ve Outcome 3 Collec..ve Outcome 2 
Collec..ve Outcome 4

15 
PART I: Response strate gy 
Multi-layered conflict and climatic shocks, compounded 
by emerging but still weak governance structures, massive 
displacement and persistent exclusion and marginalisation 
have led to a complex humanitarian environment, where 
international norms are regularly violated. Violations 
of International Humanitarian and Human Rights laws 
are causing grave protection challenges that can only be 
addressed through collective action. A significant number of 
people have been forced to flee their homes, exposing them 
to multiple risks. Cases of abuse against civilians remains a 
pervasive feature of the crisis, including widespread GBV, 
child recruitment, physical attacks, forced early marriages, 
forced evictions, limited access to humanitarian assistance 
due to insecurity and/or discriminatory practices and 
exploitation. 
Drought, floods and conflict have triggered massive 
displacement and further exposed civilians to serious 
protection threats and the emergence of negative coping 
mechanisms. Consequently, the resilience of communities 
has eroded, and social fragmentation has increased. Women, 
children, persons with disabilities, and marginalised 
communities are impacted differently by the crisis and 
displacement, having distinct humanitarian needs and 
facing specific protection concerns. Therefore, integration of 
age, gender and diversity principles in humanitarian service 
delivery and assistance remain critical. With increasing 
displacement, protection risks in IDP sites are on the rise, 
coupled with the limited options to end displacement through 
durable solutions. The consequence is the high level of 
protracted displacement characterised by chronic protection 
concerns and continued dependency on humanitarian aid. 
The centrality of protection is paramount in the response 
strategy for 2019, and underpins the HNO, as well as the 
sector-specific operational response plans in the HRP. 
Humanitarian partners consider protection as a collective 
responsibility, and the most significant protection challenges 
and violations faced by affected people require joint analysis 
and response, as well as common positions and advocacy. 
Three key protection risks/threats have been identified in 
the Centrality of Protection Strategy 2018-2019, adopted 
by the HCT in December 2017, as being critical for the 
humanitarian response in Somalia. They are centred 
around the issues of exclusion, displacement and conflict: 
1. Enhancing ways to identify and address differential 
risks of exclusion, including those based on societal 
discrimination, power structures, vulnerability, age, and 
gender. Strengthening inclusion with and accountability by, 
community-based and other non-traditional humanitarian 
responders to facilitate more effective protection for affected 
populations. 
2. Addressing increasing critical protection concerns 
emanating from displacement towards IDP sites and collective 
centres, and the heightened protection risks/threats that 
have emerged as a consequence of the multiple obstacles to 
ending displacement through appropriate solutions, such as 
local integration, return to the area of origin, and settlement 
elsewhere. 
3. Engaging with conflict-affected communities and parties 
to the conflict (national and international), to minimise the 
disproportionate and indiscriminate targeting of civilians 
and civilian assets vital for survival. This includes enhanced 
delivery of assistance and support to community based selfprotection 
mechanisms. 
In response, the HCT identified three interlinked activities as 
priorities for 2019: 
• Targeting, vulnerability and marginalisation. Those 
who are historically marginalised and those more recently 
marginalised by their presence in Al Shabab controlled areas 
all need to be considered. Work on mapping the exclusion 
will keep the HCT informed about this priority activity 
which is closely linked to the need to increase information 
and data sharing among humanitarian actors, government 
agencies and community members. The mapping will also 
support advocacy for tackling biases in practices, policies and 
procedures, including recruitment systems for employment, 
assisting HCT members in developing a position on targeting, 
vulnerability and marginalisation and related matters, such 
as resource allocation for procurement (see below). 
• Data sharing and analysis. The HCT will be provided with 
protection analysis, which will be produced by the monitoring 
system of the protection cluster. The HCT will follow the 
analysis closely, require regular updates on progress, be 
kept informed about and alert to gaps and weaknesses, and 
encourage participation by all protection and other actors 
who have the capacity to share data and support the analysis. 
The protection analysis will support the HCT’s capacity to 
mainstream protection in a relevant way, and to orient its 
response towards reaching protection results. 
• Protection Advocacy, with appropriately contextualised 
material, will be pursued energetically by the HCT with 
appropriate champions vigorously taking issues forward. 
There are numerous advocacy issues that HCT members 
may wish to bring to the HCT for support and the Protection 
Cluster and NGO consortium and others can meet as 
appropriate to draft advocacy notes to the HCT, based upon 
pertinent issues to facilitate a timely advocacy response. 
With the support of the protection cluster, promoting 
the mainstreaming of protection into humanitarian 
programming will continue with all clusters at the national 
and sub-national levels, as well as the mainstreaming of 
Gender-Based Violence (GBV) and Child Protection. For 
this HRP, partners have been systematically requested to 
identify main obstacles and security concerns affecting the 
access of targeted population to humanitarian assistance and 
protection, and mitigation and prevention measures, with a 
focus on (i) age, gender and disability, (ii) armed conflict and 
violence, and (iii) social exclusion. 
Centrality of Protection (CoP) Priorities 
Somalia Humanitarian Country Team Centrality of Protection Strategy 2018-2019

16 
PART I: Response strate gy 
Implementation and delivery considerations 
Integrated response 
The 2019 HRP will continue to advance and expand the 
integrated response approach in the delivery of humanitarian 
assistance, which encompasses all cluster strategies and 
facilitates the holistic and effective delivery of services to 
those living under the most vulnerable conditions. Based 
on experience from previous years, an integrated response 
approach has led to the more strategic use of limited resources, 
value for money and enhanced coordination among clusters. 
Responding to the intersectoral nature of the humanitarian 
needs in Somalia, the 2019 response plan also includes 24 
multi-cluster projects, covering some $39 million of the 
plan’s financial request. In addition, Integrated Emergency 
Response Teams (IERTs) by the Health, Nutrition and WASH 
clusters, used for response to the outbreaks of cholera, will be 
maintained and further encouraged. 
The HRP will be actively supported and promoted through the 
Somalia Humanitarian Fund (SHF) by focusing on integrated 
projects in its allocation rounds. For example, in 2018, $24 
million, or 48 per cent of total SHF funds, were allocated to 
integrated projects. Moreover, integrated response will be 
supported by the Disaster Operations Coordination Centres 
(DOCCs) in Mogadishu, Garowe and Baidoa, where multiple 
cluster representatives are working from the same office space 
to enhance coordination. 
Localisation 
Humanitarian action in Somalia continues to be aligned with 
commitments made at the 2016 World Humanitarian Summit 
and the Grand Bargain, including the ‘localisation of aid’. There 
are 91 National Non-Governmental Organisations (NNGOs) 
participating in the HRP, resulting in $125 million in financial 
requirements. Overall, out of the $1.08 billion required to 
implement the HRP, over 50 per cent ($582 million) is planned 
to be channelled directly or indirectly to local and national 
responders23. 
As also raised during the most recent Peer-to-Peer mission24, 
humanitarian actors clearly acknowledged that international 
organisations are working effectively with national and local 
NGOs, and in a spirit of equal partnership. Furthermore, the 
Somalia HCT includes two national NGOs, and the NGO 
Consortium which represents the humanitarian international 
and national NGO community in Somalia. 
Meanwhile, the SHF will continue its contribution to concretely 
implement ‘localisation’. By October 2018, the SHF channelled 
47 per cent, or $15.6 million, of allocations to national NGOs, 
far exceeding the 30 per cent benchmark set by the Advisory 
Board for 2018. Furthermore, the pool of SHF partners has 
expanded to more than 100, of whom more than half are 
national/local organisations. While the SHF has stepped up 
support to national partners, priority is given to those who 
are best placed to implement prioritised activities in a timely, 
efficient and accountable manner. As the prioritisation of 
funds is nested with the inter-cluster system, both at the local 
and national level, the identification of priority needs and 
geographic locations for SHF funding is collective and includes 
national and international NGOs. 
Cash-based interventions 
Given the wealth of evidence on the feasibility and benefits 
of using cash-based interventions (CBI) in Somalia for 
humanitarian response, the first question now considered by 
humanitarian agencies is always: if not cash, why not? 
In Somalia, signatories of the Grand Bargain Commitment are 
leveraging their experience and knowledge to encourage CBI 
as an important part of the humanitarian toolbox. In 2018, a 
large volume of CBI was provided through digital transfers, 
increasing the financial inclusion of those in hard-to-reach 
areas. Cash was used to meet a wide range of needs, as basic 
supplies, education, shelter, health and livelihood support. 
The use of cash reduced logistical costs associated with inkind 
assistance, while ensuring that people could make their 
own choices and stimulate their local economy. Multi-purpose 
cash responses also have the flexibility that allows needs to 
be met across multiple sectors, assessed on a multi-sector 
basis and provided to meet basic priority needs. Since the 
high-level panel discussion on humanitarian cash transfers in 
2015, agencies are applying innovative integrated approaches 
0 
20 
40 
60 
80 
100 
Enabling 
Programmes 
Refugee 
Response 
Food Protection WASH Shelter CCCM 
Security 
Multi-sectoral Nutrition Health Education 
Assistance 
Out of total $1.08bn 
required for the HRP ... 
... 55% are planned to be 
channeled to NNGOs ($582m) 
PLANNED BUDGET TO BE CHANNELED TO NATIONAL NGOS: BUDGET & PERCENTAGE AGAINST TOTAL REQUIREMENTS PER CLUSTER 
204M 
67% 
60M 
42M 44M 
91% 
23M 
22M 17M 
36M 
119M 
64% 
59% 58% 
50% 
42% 
35% 32% 30% 
10M 15% 
5M 
45% 
Required Indirect 
Funding to Natioanl Partners 91 
National Partners 
Total Requirement 
US$ 1.08 bn 
Required 
Direct 
Funding 
10%

17 
PART I: Response strate gy 
to establish and strengthen shock-response procedures by 
aligning humanitarian response with nascent safety net and 
social protection mechanisms in country. 
Even though CBIs have gained more acceptance in Somalia, inkind-
assistance still dominates emergency assistance across the 
country, and there are concerns that cash transfers are underutilised. 
To improve the systemic consideration of cash, the 
2019 HRP included a step whereby “why not cash” had to be 
addressed during the project vetting process. This initiative was 
put forth to evaluate if any reluctance to use cash reflects donors’ 
preference, lack of institutional capacity, market information, 
or a combination of all factors. In total, $292 million – or 27 
per cent of 2019 HRP requirements - are planned in cash and 
vouchers interventions. Multi-sectorial assistance for nonrefugee 
has the highest proportion of CBI, accounting for 75 
per cent of the budget, followed by the refugee response, with 
70 per cent, and Food security cluster, with 49 per cent allocated 
to CBIs. Most planned cash interventions are unrestricted and 
beneficiaries can fully make spending decisions, and some 
CBIs adopt a nutrition lens to target people in need. 
In 2019, the Somalia Cash Working Group (CWG), in 
collaboration with REACH, is planning several assessments 
around various aspects of cash feasibility to support the 
increase of CBIs. These assessments will be conducted with 
a protection lens and will include the analysis of current 
goods available, vendor capacity to restock, some assessment 
of supply chain and seasonality and demand from families, 
among others. The FSNAU will contribute to the analysis by 
monitoring and providing market data, which will be used both 
to establish cash transfer values and monitor any inflationary 
pressures. In addition, the CWG also aims to support a systemwide 
approach in the implementation of CBIs and to increase 
linkages with existing humanitarian coordination structures 
(such as ICCG and HCT) to ensure partners are “cash-ready” 
to make informed decisions on CBI. 
Gender 
Deep-rooted gender inequality, anchored in cultural norms, 
persists throughout Somalia and requires the humanitarian 
system to consider the specific needs of women, men, boys 
and girls in any intervention. Among the main challenges 
faced by women and girls, gender discrimination and genderbased 
violence (GBV) cuts across all social and economic 
strata. Women and girls from minority or marginalised groups 
are especially vulnerable25 and often face a lack of protection, 
economic opportunities, access to humanitarian aid and have 
limited, if any, access to justice26. Widows, elderly, and the 
people living with physical and mental disabilities are even 
more likely to be excluded from accessing services, particularly 
humanitarian assistance27. Women are also more present in 
the labour market, which despite the economic empowerment 
has also increased their vulnerability, especially in relation to 
GBV. Women are often sexually exploited in the workplace, and 
targeted while travelling to and from their homes28. 
The HRP aims to mitigate gender protection risks, 
particularly GBV, by ensuring that interventions are built 
on a comprehensive gender analysis. During project 
implementation and monitoring, the needs of women, men, 
boys and girls are taken into consideration29. According to the 
Gender and Age Marker database, over 25 per cent of all the 
projects submitted within the 2019 HRP in the Project Module 
system, have completed the gender questionnaire30. Of these, 
over 90 per cent mainstream gender or gender and age in their 
project. At least one third of the 97 projects that completed 
the questionnaire clearly articulate effects of gender inequality 
in relation to their sector, and 15 per cent aim to concretely 
address inequality. In addition to that, two thirds of all projects 
in the HRP adapt or tailor activities for different groups based 
on their different needs. 
Accountability to Affected Populations 
The HRP will further advance Accountability to Affected 
Population (AAP) and Communication Engagement (CE) in 
line with the Grand Bargain commitment to a ‘participation 
revolution’. The activities in the HRP will involve targeted 
people and their communities in the decision-making process, 
including by providing accessible information, ensuring that 
an effective process for participation and feedback is in place. 
The Somalia operation has an assortment of AAP/CE 
mechanisms in place, including hotlines, village committees, 
SMS feedback systems, third-party monitoring and focus 
group discussions, among others. However, there is a gap in 
the impact these mechanisms are making, as demonstrated in 
recent assessments. For instance, some 85 per cent of both host 
communities and displaced people said they did not receive 
sufficient information about humanitarian services31. It is 
particularly critical to receive adequate feedback from the most 
marginalised group of beneficiaries such as women, children, 
the elderly, child- and female-headed families, and people with 
disabilities, to reflect their voices, and to adjust humanitarian 
programming, implementation and monitoring as necessary. 
0 
20 
40 
60 
80 
100 
29.4M 
40.5M 
173.3M 
22.1M 
14.3M 3M 6.6M 1.9M 0.7M 
75% 
70% 
49% 
34% 
14% 
9% 8% 5% 1% <1% 
0.4M 
Multi-sectorial 
Assistance 
Refugee Food Security 
Response 
Shelter 
& NFIs 
WASH CCCM Protection Education Health Nutrition 
Out of total $1.08bn required for 
the HRP ... 
... 27% are planned 
for CBI ($292.1M) 
PLANNED CASHBASED INTERVENTIONS CBI: BUDGET AND PERCENTAGE AGAINST TOTAL REQUIREMENTS BY CLUSTER

18 
PART I: Response strate gy 
In 2019, humanitarian actors will increase interaction and 
communication with communities. This will also be done 
by using existing feedback mechanisms for individual 
organisations and through the humanitarian Radio Ergo. 
This Radio is considered an independent voice-based 
feedback system for gathering views and comments from 
rural and other hard-to-reach areas. In accordance with the 
recent Peer-to-Peer mission report, which reiterated the 
importance of establishing a collective approach to AAP 
and use of information from crisis-affected people to adjust 
programming, humanitarian partners will determine why a 
common feedback mechanism established in 2016 has stalled 
and identify lessons learnt for the way forward. The HCT has 
also agreed that dedicated leadership by a champion will help 
to elevate AAP/CE, institutionalise it within the leadership of 
the operation, and drive it forward in support of the HCT. 
Protection from Sexual Exploitation and Abuse (PSEA) 
In 2019, the humanitarian community will holistically address 
Prevention of Sexual Exploitation and Abuse (PSEA). In 
2018, the PSEA Task Force Steering Committee presented 
and initiated the implementation of a PSEA Task Force work 
plan. A comprehensive PSEA strategy has been adopted 
and its implementation will be facilitated by the PSEA Task 
Force Steering Committee. As a key part of implementation 
in 2018, the HCT was briefed and trained in IASC standards, 
and each agency nominated a PSEA focal point, to whom 
any complaints or concerns can be addressed and who will 
constitute the PSEA Task Force at the country level. For 2019, 
the HCT has committed to the IASC standards of PSEA, and 
will work on strengthening the PSEA Task Force by placing a 
dedicated PSEA Coordinator under the DSRSG, developing 
Standard Operating Procedures and establishing a pilot 
community-based complaint mechanism (CBCM) which 
will improve the access for vulnerable populations to report 
exploitation and abuse. 
Developed in line with the vision of the National 
Development Plan 2017-19 (NDP) and under the leadership 
of the Minister for Humanitarian Affairs and Disaster 
Management (MoHADM), the Disaster Management 
Policy aims at providing a legislative framework for the 
establishment of a comprehensive disaster management 
system in Somalia. The policy combines measures on 
disaster preparedness, prevention and mitigation as well as 
on response, recovery and reconstruction. It also ensures 
to embed disaster management into national development 
activities. 
The Policy is based on eight guiding principles – State 
responsibility, division of roles among the different 
levels of the government, local risk assessments and 
capacity, capacity building, community participation 
and resilience, coordination and partnership, neutral 
and non-discriminatory interventions, responsibility of 
the Government to protect - to which all the relevant 
institutions part of the Federal Government of Somalia 
(FGS) are required to abide by. Equally, the policy has set six 
main objectives: 
1. Ensure that disaster management interventions are 
undertaken systematically and expeditiously in order to 
both save and protect lives, livelihoods, assets, and promote 
disaster risk reduction. 
2. Provide a clear framework for disaster prevention, 
mitigation, preparedness, response, recovery and 
reconstruction, undertaken within a risk management 
framework by all parts of the government. 
3. Ensure that institutions and activities for disaster 
risk management are coordinated and delivered in 
partnership between the governments at various levels 
(Federal, State and local authorities), local communities, 
Somali Red Crescent, United Nations, private sector 
and non-governmental organisations, as well as regional 
institutions in Africa. 
4. To clarify for all involved the role of key government 
departments and institutions at the federal, member state 
and district levels in various aspects of disaster management, 
and how they work with and complement each other. 
5. To mainstream disaster risk reduction in development 
plans and strategies at all levels to enhance capacity of 
vulnerable communities to withstand the adverse effects of 
disasters. 
6. To provide direction to all federal Ministries and 
institutions of the Federal Government of Somalia 
to prepare Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) in 
consonance with this policy and encourage all Member State 
institutions, District Authorities and other stakeholders to 
prepare SOPs for their respective institutions in areas directly 
related to disaster prevention, mitigation, preparedness, risk 
assessment, early warning, immediate response, recovery 
and reconstruction. 
Acknowledging the linkages and interdependence between 
the vulnerability of Somali people to disasters as well as 
their resilience to shocks, the disaster management policy 
was crafted as a multi-sectorial and holistic approach that 
would go beyond relief alone, pointing at strengthening the 
synergies with resilience and development actors. 
The policy document will be reviewed in 2020. 
National Disaster Management Policy 2017-19

19 
PART I: Operationa l capacity 
OPERATIONAL 
CAPACITY 
The number of humanitarian partners continue to increase in the country, 
despite the challenging operational environment. A wide range of national and 
international organisations are involved in the delivery of humanitarian assistance 
in all 18 regions of the country, with 328 partners actively implementing activities. 
The operational capacity increased by nearly 38 per cent 
over the course of 2018, from 238 humanitarian partners in 
December 2017 to 328 in December 2018. The increase is 
primarily due to improved coordination, especially among 
local organisations, better data collection, and the extension of 
humanitarian interventions in places that were not previously 
accessible. Improvements in risk mitigation and management 
has built confidence among international partners in the 
provision of support to local organisations in the delivery of 
assistance in hard-to-reach areas. Though humanitarian access 
remains a challenge, there was slight increase in number of 
partners in some areas, notably Galmudug and Hirshabelle 
States. 
# OF HUMANITARIAN 
PARTNERS 
328 
ETHIOPIA
DJIBOUTI 
Bari 
Bay 
Mudug 
Sool 
gedo 
Sanaag 
Hiraan 
galgaduud 
lower 
Juba 
Nugaal 
Bakool 
Togdheer 
Awdal 
woqooyi 
galbeed 
Middle Juba 
Banadir
Middle 
Shabelle 
lower 
Shabelle 
55 
58 
65 
81 
59 
82 
85 
105 
63 
69 
49 
54 
42 
70 
5 
39 
56 
148 
Mogadishu 
I N D I A N 
OCEAN 
G U L F O F A D E N 
KENYA 
Sources: IMwg & Somalia Clusters 
Severity of needs 
— + 
# of humanitarian presence 
*The numbers in the map reflects the partners working in each region. Note that the same organisation might have activities in more than one 
region at the same time.

20 
PART I: Humanitarian Access 
HUMANITARIAN 
ACCESS 
Securing access to deliver humanitarian assistance and the ability of affected 
populations to access assistance and protection will remain a priority for 
humanitarian actors in 2019. Active conflict and insecurity, particularly on key 
supply routes, interference in the implementation of humanitarian activities, 
bureaucratic impediments and attacks against humanitarian staff and assets, 
continue to constrain the humanitarian assistance in Somalia. 
# OF INCIDENTS 
DIRECTLY IMPACTING 
HUMANITARIAN 
OPERATIONS IN 2018 
>110

21 
PART I: Humanitarian Access 
Ongoing active conflict, insecurity and restrictions on the 
movement of goods and personnel has limited humanitarian 
access into contested areas or those not under government 
control. As consequence, people in hard-to-reach areas, often 
including highly vulnerable families, might receive little, if any 
assistance. 
Although local partners have been more successful in securing 
access in conflict-affected areas, much more needs to be 
done to ensure the safe, unimpeded and predictable passage 
of humanitarian goods and personnel to affected zones. 
Additional steps will be taken to strengthen the capacity of 
front-line partners and develop relationships with authorities, 
local administrations, security actors and key stakeholders 
across the country. OCHA is working with humanitarian 
partners to improve access by monitoring impediments, 
advocating with authorities at national and local levels, and 
improving civil-military coordination. 
Conflict - Active conflict, including clan conflicts and military 
operations, will continue to force civilians to leave their homes 
and farms, towards main population centres, in Baidoa, 
Mogadishu and Kismayo, or towards AMISOM bases, further 
reducing the already overstretched resources and weakened 
resilience of many communities. Lower Shabelle and Lower 
Juba will likely remain a focus for active clashes in southern 
and central Somalia, with Lower Shabelle reporting the highest 
number of conflict incidents and violence. The planned 
drawdown and focus of AMISOM along main supply routes 
may limit the mission’s logistical capability and will likely 
reduce security operations in other areas. 
Electoral violence – In 2019, there may also be a reduction 
in humanitarian access and operations as result of political 
violence. A long electoral season in the lead up to the 2020 
voting campaign will likely see a steady rise in violence, 
including clan competition and disruption of government-led 
election processes at the regional and national levels. This may 
restrict movement of goods and personnel, and may lead to 
delays or suspension of humanitarian services. 
Violence against humanitarians - Humanitarian operations 
continue to be affected by violence in southern and central 
Somalia, with isolated incidents still reported in the north. 
Direct targeting has included abductions of humanitarian 
staff, expulsion, arrest and detention, as well as deaths. Armed 
violence and clashes at distribution sites also continue to be 
reported. Incidents directly targeting humanitarians are 
reported more frequently in Mogadishu and in rural areas, 
impacting mainly the front-line responders. 
Road access challenges – The use of improvised explosive 
devices on key supply roads, including the Mogadishu to 
Jowhar corridor, attacks on trucks using main supply routes 
in Hiraan, as well as reports of checkpoint fees continue to 
negatively impact road movement. Ongoing blockades of 
goods moving by road into government-controlled towns are 
also likely to reduce freedom of movement for humanitarian 
and commercial supplies. Extortion, illegal checkpoints and 
increasing fees that are demanded along the Mogadishu- 
Afgooye-Baidoa and Mogadishu-Jowhar routes and in 
Galmudug State, by elements from both state and non-state 
affiliated groups, will continue to put pressure on all traffic. 
Bureaucratic impediments - Without a common regulatory 
framework, aid organisations continue to report ad-hoc and 
arbitrary taxation requests by some local and state authorities, 
interference in staff recruitment, as well as supply and 
procurement procedures. This has led to disruptions, delays, 
intrusions in humanitarian facilities, arrests, detention and 
in some cases expulsions of humanitarian workers, with 
occasional suspensions of humanitarian programmes. In 2018, 
such incidents led to the arrest and temporary detention of 18 
humanitarian workers and expulsion of three32. 
VIOLENT INCIDENTS IN 2018 
• Over 110 violent incidents 
directly impacting humanitarian 
organisations 
• 9 humanitarian personnel killed 
• 13 humanitarian personnel 
injured 
• 22 humanitarian personnel 
abducted 
• 18 arrested or temporarily 
detained

22 
PART I: Response Monitorin g 
RESPONSE 
MONITORING 
In 2019, the humanitarian community will build on the enhanced collective 
monitoring mechanisms that were established in 2018 and will continue to 
monitor the situation closely to be able to adjust the response according to the 
needs and emerging priorities. Efficiency and accountability will be strengthened 
through monthly and periodic review and monitoring of the impact and reach of 
the response. 
Scope of the response monitoring 
Humanitarian partners will be closely monitoring the 
response, changes in context dynamics, identifying needs and 
gaps in real time, and improving efficiency where possible to 
ensure the best use of resources. The in-depth understanding 
of the response and gaps allows for enhanced prioritisation 
and enables improved targeting to reach the most vulnerable. 
Monthly Humanitarian Dashboards, ad hoc needs assessments, 
in addition to regular assessments conducted by the FSNAU, 
DOCC and ICCG, among other tools, provide regular analysis 
of the needs and humanitarian response in Somalia. The 
mechanisms also indicate the progress against the key clusterspecific 
outcome indicators, all linked to the four over-arching 
strategic objectives of the HRP. 
Monitoring responsibilities 
Under the strategic guidance of the HCT, the ICCG is tasked 
to assess progress toward reaching strategic objectives, cluster 
objectives, and cluster activities, as outlined in the HRP. Based 
on regular reviews of the evolving needs and most critical 
gaps, the ICCG regularly makes recommendations to the 
HCT for action or adjustments in the response operation. 
The Information Management Working Group (IMWG) will 
support the ICCG in undertaking these tasks. In 2019, the 
ICCG and the IMWG will focus increasingly on the joint 
analysis of monitoring data and strengthening guidance on 
data collection methodologies for monitoring. To enable 
stronger data analysis, the ICCG and the IMWG will also 
strengthen the use of the online RPM module33 . The Response 
Planning and Monitoring tool manages the development and 
subsequent monitoring of the strategic framework at the intercluster 
and cluster levels, supporting first the HRP planning 
process, and then the periodic monitoring processes which 
happen throughout the year. 
Monitoring Framework 
Progress against the strategic objectives, indicators/targets 
and outcomes of the HRP will be monitored by using the 
HRP Monitoring Framework (Part III: Annexes). In 2018, 
Cluster Frameworks were developed by each of the clusters, 
and included in the RPM online platform. Reporting on 
the objectives and indicators will be done by collecting key 
figures in the RPM, and consolidating the data acquired 
in monthly Humanitarian Dashboards. The HCT will also 
produce a mid-year monitoring report and/or theme/issuebased 
analytical monitoring reports. At the operational 
level, clusters and partners will work through the DOCCs 
to coordinate monitoring of the response at the national 
and sub-national level, identify response priorities, ensure 
enhanced coordination and information sharing. In case the 
humanitarian situation changes drastically during 2019, or 
major new humanitarian needs emerge, the HCT can revise 
the HRP and the monitoring framework accordingly. 
HUMANITARIAN PROGRAMME CYCLE TIMELINE 
Humanitarian Dashboard 
Periodic Monitoring Report 
Humanitarian Needs Overview 
Humanitarian Response Plan 
JAN 
Response Planning & Monitoring 
FEB MAR APR MAY JUN JUL AUG SEP OCT NOV DEC JAN 
2019 2020

23 
PART I: Summar y of nee ds, targets & re quirements 
SUMMARY OF 
NEEDS, TARGETS & 
REQU IREMENTS 
PEOPLE IN NEED 
4.2M 
PEOPLE TARGETED 
3.4M 
REQUIREMENTS (US$) 
1.08BN 
In 2019, 4.2 million people will need humanitarian assistance. 
This figure represents a reduction of 32 per cent, from 6.2 
million people in 2018, which is due to the combination of the 
overall improvement in the food security outlook linked to the 
above average Gu rains, sustained humanitarian response, as 
well as a revised methodology for calculating the number of 
people in need34. 
For 2019, the total number of people in need was calculated 
by summing the highest people in need figure of a cluster in 
each region. All clusters utilised the same base population data 
sources for the calculation and disaggregation of the people in 
need figures35, both overall and on a sectoral basis. 
Equally, to define the total target – 3.4 million people – 
humanitarian partners adopted the highest target figure out 
of all Clusters by region. Other elements were considered in 
the target calculation both at intersectoral and sectoral level: 
the severity of needs as identified in the HNO, the operational 
capacity to deliver, security and access. 
As a consequence of a more focused approach to defining 
humanitarian needs in the HNO and people targeted in 
the HRP, the financial requirements have been reduced 
from $1.54 billion in 2018 to approximately $1.08 billion in 
2019, representing nearly 30 per cent reduction in financial 
requirements. 
1.8M - - - 
- - - 
1.4M - 41.5K 1.1M 
1M 16K 39K 1.4M 
202K - 120K 
364K 10K - 764K 
1.1M 39K - 276K 
1.4M 
41.5K 
41.5K 1.1M 
- - - 
1.4M -
-
- 
142K 
2.6M 
1.8M
- 
3.5M 
3M 
1.5M 
2.6M 
2.3M 
2.9M 
- 
1.8M 
337K 
- 
2.6M 
2.4M 
1.1M 
1.6M 
2.6M 
-
- 
4.2M* 3.4M* 1.08BN 
Camp Coordination and 
Camp Management (CCCM) 
Education 
Enabling Programmes 
Food Security 
Health 
Nutrition 
Protection 
Shelter/NFIs 
Water, Sanitation and 
Hygiene (WASH) 
Multi-Sectoral Assistance 
IDPs Refugees/ 
Asylum 
seekers 
Refugee 
Returnees 
Host 
communities 
Total in US$ 
TOTAL BY STATUS 
32M 
32M 
178M 
84M 
353M 
93M 
64M 
104M 
39M 
40M 
% Female % children, 
adult, elderly** 
BY SEX & AGE REQUIREMENTS 
People 
targeted 
People 
in need 
**Children (<18 years old), adult (18-59 years), elderly (>59 years) 
*Total figure is not the total of the column, as the same people may appear several times 
TOTAL 
Refugee Response 131K 81K - 39K 41.5K - 58M 
1.4M 
BREAKDOWN OF PEOPLE TARGETED 
15K 
2M* 39K* 41.5K* 1.3M* 
51% 
50% 
50% 
50% 
50% 
51% 
51% 
50% 
50% 
- 
61|37|2% 
99.6|0.4|0% 
59|39|2% 
63|33|4% 
61|37|2% 
55|43|2% 
59|39|2% 
59|39|2% 
59|39|2% 
-

24 
PART I: Summar y of nee ds, targets & re quirements 
PART II: OPERATIONAL 
RESPONSE PLANS 
Multi-Sectoral Assistance 
Refugee Response Plan 
Camp Coordination & Camp Management 
Education 
Enabling Programmes 
Food Security 
Health 
Nutrition 
Protection 
Shelter 
Water, Sanitation & Hygiene (WASH)

25 
PART II: camp coordination and CAMP management (CCCM) 
PEOPLE IN NEED 
2.6M 
REQUIREMENTS (US$) 
32M 
(9% cash) 
PEOPLE TARGETED 
1.8M 
# OF PARTNERS 
17 
Overview/Cluster context 
Camp Coordination and Camp Management 
(CCCM) systems are required to ensure 
equitable access to services and protection 
for displaced persons in informal settlements. 
People displaced to informal sites do not have 
their basic needs met due to the inconsistent 
provision of services or exclusion from 
accessing humanitarian support as a result of 
poor targeting of sites. Displaced people in 
informal sites are in the greatest need of CCCM 
services to reduce barriers to assistance, 
ensure access to quality basic services, 
enhance the accountability of humanitarian 
actors to affected populations, and strengthen 
community participation and empowerment 
through consistent engagement. 
Targeting and response priorities/ 
boundaries 
Based on figures collected through the CCCM 
Cluster Detailed Site Assessment (DSA), the 
CCCM Cluster will target 1.8 million people 
living in IDP sites in accessible areas. The 
CCCM Cluster will prioritise districts with 
the largest numbers of displaced people for 
site coordination and management activities. 
Sites will be targeted through discussions and 
coordination with local authorities and the 
humanitarian community at the district level 
to ensure services reach the most vulnerable 
populations, particularly women and children 
from marginalised clans. The Cluster will put 
mechanisms in place that ensure the most 
vulnerable, including the elderly and disabled, 
have equal access to services that are delivered 
within a protective environment. 
Response strategy and modalities 
The CCCM Cluster will continue to support 
displaced populations in sites through the 
following activities: (i) improve site level 
coordination ensuring equitable access 
to quality basic services; (ii) strengthen 
community participation and their 
empowerment through consistent engagement; 
(iii) monitoring and mapping service 
delivery at site level to ensure efficiency and 
accountability; (iv) reinforcing mechanisms 
for communication and feedback on multisector 
services; (v) improve living conditions 
of populations through site improvement and 
maintenance; (vi) enhance coordination with 
local authorities and development partners to 
support displaced people in sites to achieve 
durable solutions; (vii) and information 
collection of populations data through DSA 
and site verification exercises as a baseline of 
access and availability of services in sites. 
In coordination with local authorities, the 
CCCM Cluster will use an area based approach 
at the district level to ensure the effective 
coordination and management of IDP sites 
using mobile teams. When appropriate, the 
CCCM Cluster will support CBIs, such as 
improving site safety through cash-for-work 
programmes and the allocation of cash grants 
to camp committees. To minimise pull factors 
to sites, the CCCM cluster will advocate 
for basic services provision in sites through 
integrated programming and in parallel 
for centralised access to services outside of 
sites, which will benefit both IDPs and host 
communities. 
51% 61 | 37| 2% 
PEOPLE IN NEED 
PEOPLE TARGETED 
FINANCIAL 
REQUIREMENTS 
2.6M - - - 
1.8M - - - 51% 61 | 37| 2% 
IDPs Refugees/ 
Asylum 
seekers 
Refugee 
Returnees 
Host 
Communities 
% female % children, 
adult, 
elderly* 
BY STATUS BY SEX & AGE 
*Children (<18 years old), adult 
$32M (18-59 years), elderly (>59 years) 
CONTACT 
Kathryn Ziga 
Cluster Coordinator 
kziga@iom.int 
Muhammad Ilyas 
Cluster Coordinator 
ilyas@unhcr.org 
CCCM OBJECTIVE 1: 1Improve living conditions of 
displaced people through 
site development, care and 
maintenance. 
RELATES TO SO1, SO3 
CCCM OBJECTIVE 2: 2Strengthen community selfmanagement 
and access to 
information for displaced 
populations. 
RELATES TO SO1, SO2 
CCCM OBJECTIVE 3: 3Support opportunities for displaced 
people to achieve durable 
solutions. 
RELATES TO SO1, SO2 
CAMP COORDINATION AND CAMP 
MANAGEMENT (CCCM) 
BREAKDOWN OF PEOPLE IN NEED AND TARGETED BY STATUS, SEX AND AGE 
Detailed sector response plan can be found at https://www.humanitarianresponse.info/en/ 
operations/somalia/somalia-camp-coordination-and-camp-management

26 
PART II: camp coordination and CAMP management (CCCM) 
CCCM actors are committed to the responsible provision of 
equitable access to services by all beneficiaries. Improving 
quality of life and restoring dignity during displacement 
involves creating mechanisms and structuring programs to 
ensure that displaced persons are able to hold humanitarians 
accountable. CCCM partners will ensure that two-way 
communication channels are available to displaced people and 
will guarantee IDP participation during service delivery. 
The CCCM Cluster will work together with the Protection 
Cluster to develop strategies to mitigate exclusion of populations 
in service delivery. CCCM Cluster will strengthen complaints 
and feedback mechanisms and encourage all actors to prioritise 
communication with communities (CwC) as a core component 
of their programming to mitigate exclusion based on ethnicity, 
age, disability or gender ensuring the participation of all 
groups in decision making process. The CCCM Cluster will 
also advocate for community cohesion projects to minimise 
potential tension between displaced and host communities 
related to the delivery of humanitarian assistance. 
Photo: Max Schott/UNOCHA

27 
PART II: education 
EDUCATION 
Overview/Cluster context 
Conflict and natural disasters have undermined 
social and economic development in Somalia, 
leaving communities with socio-economic 
vulnerabilities that demand more resources, 
thus reducing the priority of education. The 
education system has suffered widespread loss 
and damage, resulting in limited capacity and 
resources. Access to education has reached 
a historic low, with more than three million 
children out of schools in Somalia. The 
national Gross Enrollment Rate (GER) is 30 
per cent for primary education and 26 per 
cent for secondary level education. A recent 
assessment report indicates that 58 per cent 
of girls in host communities, and 75 per cent 
of girls in displaced communities, are not 
attending school36. In addition, the dropout 
rate of those from host communities is around 
30 per cent, and 17 per cent for those from IDP 
communities37. These national figures hide 
significantly worse regional-level variations. 
A high number of children are not able to 
access and attend schools. Furthermore, 
school dropouts are a major concern, as girls 
are forced in to early marriages and boys are 
recruited into armed groups or are exposed to 
other vices. 
The fragilities of the education system are 
exacerbated by inequalities in children’s 
access to and progression through education 
systems, gender disparities, untrained 
teachers, few female teachers and inadequate 
learning environments. An estimated 1.8 
million school-aged IDP and host community 
children are in need of education support. 
Capacity constraints of the Ministry of 
Education, limited outreach and weak 
governance structures have had a negative 
impact on education. Learning is regularly 
interrupted by various emergencies, 
absenteeism of teachers, lack of funding 
among others and, for those who do have 
access to education, attendance is often 
inconsistent. 
Targeting and response priorities/ 
boundaries 
The Education Cluster will aim to support 
337,000 out of 1.8 million school-aged 
children in need of education interventions. 
Response priority will be given to the most 
vulnerable children among displaced people 
and food insecure families. The Education 
Cluster will focus on immediate educational 
interventions, to ensure that school-aged 
children have access to quality education in 
a safe and protected learning environment, 
which should result in improved school 
retention rates. 
To improve to improve quality of education 
during crisis, the Education Cluster and 
partners will work to enhance the pedagogical 
and psychosocial capacity of teachers and 
school staff. A key focus will be ensuring the 
well-being of children and improving learning 
outcomes. 
The Education Cluster will work closely 
with the Ministry of Education, as well 
as Community Education Committees, 
to strengthen capacity and promote the 
ownership and sustainability of education 
services. The education response will be 
CONTACT 
Sara Skovgaard 
Cluster Coordinator 
sskovgaard@unicef.org 
51% 99.4 | 0.6| 0% 
PEOPLE IN NEED 
PEOPLE TARGETED 
FINANCIAL 
REQUIREMENTS 
1.1M 
15K 51% 99.4 | 0.6| 0% 
42K 724K 
202K 120K 
IDPs Refugees/ 
Asylum 
seekers 
Refugee 
Returnees 
Host 
Communities 
% female % children, 
adult, 
elderly* 
BY STATUS BY SEX & AGE 
*Children (<18 years old), adult 
$40M (18-59 years), elderly (>59 years) 
BREAKDOWN OF PEOPLE IN NEED AND TARGETED BY STATUS, SEX AND AGE 
Detailed sector response plan can be found at https://www.humanitarianresponse.info/en/ 
operations/somalia/education 
PEOPLE IN NEED 
1.8M 
REQUIREMENTS (US$) 
40M 
(5% cash) 
PEOPLE TARGETED 
337k 
# OF PARTNERS 
24 
EDUCATION OBJECTIVE 1: 1Ensure vulnerable children/ 
youth are engaged in life-saving 
learning that promotes personal 
well-being and social cohesio.s. 
RELATES TO SO1, SO2& SO4 
EDUCATION OBJECTIVE 2: 2Strengthened capacity to deliver 
effective and coordinated 
education in emergencies, 
preparedness and response within the 
education. 
RELATES TO SO1 & SO4

28 
PART II: education 
designed to meet the needs of vulnerable girls, women, boys 
and men, in both IDP and host communities, ensuring gender 
inclusiveness and equal access to services. It will further 
prioritise the identification and mitigation of protection risks 
in order to reduce school-aged children’s exposure to GBV and 
other safety concerns. 
Response strategy and modalities 
The education response aims to (i) provide vulnerable, schoolaged 
children and youth with immediate access to safe learning 
opportunities, (ii) support learners’ retention, (iii) improve 
learning environments, and (iv) strengthen and improve the 
quality and effectiveness of service delivery. Greater focus will 
be given to system strengthening, ensuring sustainability, and 
on enhancing education capacities, particularly with respect 
to education in emergencies, preparedness, and response 
planning within the education system. Support will be given to 
develop the Ministry of Education’s capacity for education in 
emergencies and community engagement, and to implement 
effective emergency preparedness and response, in line with 
education strategic sector plans. In addition, the response will 
continue to invest in the capacity-building of local partners as 
an integral part of the broader partnership programme, in line 
with global commitments made with respect to localisation at 
the 2016 World Humanitarian Summit and the Grand Bargain 
The protection crisis remains a persistent humanitarian 
challenge. Accordingly, the education response will be driven 
by a protection-sensitive approach which underpins the 
Centrality of Protection Strategy for Somalia. Supporting 
education, and its ‘built-in’ protective components such as 
physical, psychosocial and cognitive protection, provides 
vital continuity and support for children living through crisis. 
Education will play a role in enhancing child protection as a 
service to be supported and delivered, and as an ‘enabling right’ 
which facilitates children’s access to their other rights. Although 
the drought has ended, the food security situation remains dire 
with 1.5 million people facing crisis, or worse, levels of food 
security in 2019. Accordingly, school feeding programs and 
the provision of water will be included as an element of the 
response. 
The education response will support vulnerable and 
marginalised girls and boys among the internally displaced and 
food insecure communities in southern and central Somalia, 
Puntland and Somaliland. With the potential for education to 
be used as a central platform for coordinated and integrated 
humanitarian response, the Education Cluster will continue 
to work closely with the WASH, Protection, Food Security, 
Health and Nutrition Clusters to expand the range of services 
provided to children in schools. Providing a range of services 
in will facilitate access to education, improve education quality, 
and increase the retention of learners. When appropriate, 
the cluster will support cash based interventions to support 
attendance, teacher incentives, school capitalisation grants and 
other relevant areas. 
Photo: BREC

29 
PART II: enabling programme 
Overview 
To ensure an efficient coordination system 
is in place among humanitarian partners, 
including support to the FGS and the HCT, 
OCHA will continue to play a central role in 
enabling effective humanitarian response and 
ensuring a coherent response to emergencies. 
Civil-military and inter-cluster coordination, 
information management, preparedness and 
contingency planning, resource mobilisation 
and advocacy will remain priorities. 
Overall, severe access constraints continue 
to have a direct impact on the ability of the 
humanitarian community to effectively 
deliver humanitarian relief to populations in 
need. The logistics sector has been included in 
Enabling Programmes, in order to build upon 
the currently-limited capacity among national 
actors, and to increase the mitigation of, 
preparation for, and response to emergencies 
and shocks. 
Response Strategy 
In 2019, strengthening coordination and 
the capacity of relevant Government 
counterparts, national and sub-national 
coordination forums and partners will remain 
a priority. Regional inter-cluster coordination 
forums will be strengthened to facilitate 
localised situational analysis, to identify gaps, 
and mobilise response, including improving 
seasonal planning, in line with the IASC 
Emergency Response Preparedness (ERP) 
approach. 
The Somalia NGO Consortium will support 
NGO coordination mechanisms to improve 
aid coordination and promote national 
NGO representation within the coordination 
structures across Somalia. Furthermore, the 
NGO Consortium will continue to strengthen 
the capacity of national NGOs in improving 
front-line response. 
In 2019, improved collaboration with 
development partners to address chronic 
needs and vulnerabilities will be a priority, 
with a focus on the agreed Collective 
Outcomes, which includes reducing needs, 
risks and vulnerabilities and increasing 
resilience. Clusters will continue to identify 
priority needs through cluster-specific and 
integrated needs assessments, and will ensure 
timely reporting and monitoring to eliminate 
gaps and duplications in response. 
The FSNAU will continue to provide 
information on the food and nutrition 
situation that supports prioritisation of 
response. FSNAU will also provide additional 
information through its Early Warning Early 
Action Dashhboard in order to support 
timely and prioritised response. Additionally, 
the Somalia Water and Land Information 
Management (SWALIM) will continue to 
provide early warning information to improve 
flood- risk management and to develop 
the risk management capacity of partners, 
in particular, the Government’s Disaster 
Management Agency. 
Radio Ergo will produce and air daily 
humanitarian programming, including lifesaving 
and disaster risk reduction messaging 
to communities across Somalia, by using 
shortwave and FM broadcasts. Furthermore, 
Radio Ergo will providel advocacy 
programming and dialogue facilitation with 
communities to support the overall delivery 
of humanitarian aid. Radio Ergo will also 
share its independently gathered audience 
feedback from mainly rural areas to inform 
the humanitarian response. 
The International NGO Safety Organisation 
(INSO) Somalia will contribute to 
international and national NGOs operating 
safely and securely by providing timely and 
relevant information and analysis with special 
focus to support NGOs relocating offices to 
Somalia. 
The United Nations Department for Safety 
and Security (UNDSS) will continue to 
enhance security for UN Agencies, and 
provide emergency medical response teams 
that are capable of delivering rapid lifesupport 
interventions to UN and INGO staff 
in Somalia. 
Air services provided by the United Nations 
Humanitarian Air Service (UNHAS) continue 
to constitute the only option to travel to most 
destinations within Somalia. The lack of safe, 
secure and efficient commercial alternative, 
makes UNHAS one of few options to reach 
locations safely and to ensure a high standard 
of aviation security on the ground. The need 
for UNHAS to provide crucial air services 
for the entire humanitarian community will 
remain at the core of the logistics response. 
CONTACT 
Justin Brady 
OCHA Head of Office 
bradyj@un.org 
Franklyn Frimpong 
Head of UNHAS 
franklyn.frimpong@ 
wfp.org 
REQUIREMENTS (US$) ENABLING PROGRAMME 
32M 
# OF PARTNERS 
7 
ENABLING PROGRAMME 
OBJECTIVE 1: 1Ensure effective, principled and 
well-coordinated humanitarian 
aid to ensure equal access for 
women, girls, boys and men 
RELATES TO SO1, SO2, SO3 
& SO4 
ENABLING PROGRAMME 
OBJECTIVE 2: 2Provide timely and relevant 
information to the population 
and humanitarian partners, to 
ensure a common understanding of 
humanitarian needs and to enable 
more informed decision making. 
RELATES TO SO1, SO2, SO3 
& SO4 
ENABLING PROGRAMME 
OBJECTIVE 3: 3Fill in the identified logistics 
gaps through facilitating access 
to logistics services and ensure 
continuity of the UN Humanitarian Air 
Service flights. 
RELATES TO SO1, SO2, SO3 
& SO4

30 
PART II: food security 
FOOD SECURITY 
Overview /Cluster context 
Recent climatic improvements and the largescale 
delivery of humanitarian assistance 
led to an improvement in the food security 
situation in Somalia. Still, acute food 
insecurity, malnutrition and livelihood needs 
remain, with two in five Somalis acutely food 
insecure. Seasonal assessment results indicate 
severe levels of acute food insecurity and 
malnutrition among the 2.6 million IDPs. 
The residual impact of the 2016/17 drought, 
combined with recent floods, a cyclone, 
displacement, evictions, and other factors, 
continues to undermine opportunities for 
food security improvements, especially for 
the most vulnerable Somalis. Contrary to 
earlier forecasts, the latest projections indicate 
that the Deyr seasonal rainfall is expected 
to be below average, despite the expectation 
of a weak El Niño. Consequently, there is an 
increased risk for the deterioration of pasture 
and water resources, which could negatively 
impact food security outcomes. 
Under these circumstances, recent food 
security improvements are at risk of 
deterioration if humanitarian assistance is 
not sustained, particularly among vulnerable 
population groups. Furthermore, to ensure 
lasting improvements in the food security 
situation, sustained assistance and livelihood 
support is necessary. 
The recent post-Gu assessment, done by the 
Food Security and Nutrition Analysis Unit 
(FSNAU), indicates that 4.6 million people 
are acutely food insecure (IPC 2 or higher). 
Approximately 40 per cent (or 1.1 million 
people) of those classified under IPC 2 will 
be reached through the RRF, and funded by 
development partners. 
The Food Security Cluster will strive to 
create a protective environment in which 
the most vulnerable, particularly female and 
child headed households, can safely access 
services and goods. The Cluster will continue 
to work with the GBV Sub-cluster to mitigate 
protection risks during food/cash distribution 
and increase access to livelihood opportunities 
for survivors of GBV. 
Targeting38 and response priorities/ 
boundaries 
The Food Security Cluster objectives focus on 
(i) increasing immediate access to food, (ii) 
protecting and restoring livelihood-related 
food and income sources, and (iii) supporting 
the resilience of vulnerable communities and 
households against shocks. Target population 
groups and key priority activities are 
summarised below. 
Objective 1: To improve immediate access to 
food, priority activities include unconditional 
transfers (e.g. food assistance and cash) 
and conditional transfers (e.g. cash-forwork 
for small-scale infrastructure repairs). 
Approximately 1.6 million people who are 
facing severe levels of food insecurity (IPC 
Phases 3, 4 and 5) will be supported under 
this objective. 
Objective 2: To protect and restore 
livelihood-related food and income sources. 
Priority activities include the provision of: (i) 
seasonally appropriate agricultural inputs (e.g. 
certified quality seed, farm tools, training, 
BREAKDOWN OF PEOPLE IN NEED AND TARGETED BY STATUS, SEX AND AGE 
Detailed sector response plan can be found at https://fscluster.org/somalia 
PEOPLE IN NEED 
3.5M 
REQUIREMENTS (US$) 
353M 
(49% cash) 
PEOPLE TARGETED 
2.6M 
# OF PARTNERS 
62 
FOOD SECURITY OBJECTIVE 1: 1Improve households’ immediate 
access to food through provision 
of conditional and unconditional 
assistance depending on the severity 
of food insecurity phases, vulnerability 
and seasonality of the livelihoods. (IPC 
3-5) RELATES TO SO1, SO2 
FOOD SECURITY OBJECTIVE 2: 2PFOOD SECURITY OBJECTIVE 2: 
Protect and restore livelihoods, 
related food and income sources, 
through provision of seasonally 
appropriate livelihood inputs and 
technical support in rural and (peri-) 
urban settings. (IPC 2-4) 
RELATES TO SO1, SO2 
FOOD SECURITY OBJECTIVE 3: 3Support household and 
community resilience to shocks, 
through rehabilitation and/ 
or restoration of productive assets, 
enhance livelihood strategies and 
disaster preparedness. (IPC 2-4) 
RELATES TO SO1, SO4 
CONTACT 
Mulugeta Shibru 
Cluster Coordinator 
mulugeta.shibru@fao. 
org 
Bernard Mrewa 
Cluster Coordinator 
bernard.mrewa@wfp. 
org 
50% 59 | 39| 2% 
PEOPLE IN NEED 
PEOPLE TARGETED 
FINANCIAL 
REQUIREMENTS 
1.9M 
50% 59 | 39| 2% 
92K 1.5M 
1.4M 41.5K 1.1M 
-
- 
IDPs Refugees/ 
Asylum 
seekers 
Refugee 
Returnees 
Host 
Communities 
% female % children, 
adult, 
elderly* 
BY STATUS BY SEX & AGE 
*Children (<18 years old), adult 
$353M (18-59 years), elderly (>59 years)

31 
PART II: food security 
land preparation and irrigation support), (ii) emergency 
livestock assistance (e.g. supportive treatment, vaccinations, 
feed, fodder production), (iii) livelihood diversification (e.g. 
fishing, backyard poultry and vocational programmes), 
(iv) improved post-harvest practices, and (v) response to 
food chain threats (e.g. fall armyworm, desert locusts, trans 
boundary animal disease). The scope of these activities will 
continue to be informed by the ongoing discussions on the 
RRF to ensure complementarity with development activities 
and the maximum impact of assistance. The cumulative target 
is 900,000 acutely food insecure people, including rural IDPs 
(IPC Phases 2, 3, 4 and 5). 
Objective 3: To support the resilience of vulnerable populations 
against shock. This objective will contribute to protecting and 
conserving natural resources on which lives, and livelihoods 
depend, such as water, soil, land and forest resources. The 
activities will be directed at repairing and effectively managing 
small-scale productive infrastructure to mitigate shocks (e.g. 
river de-silting and embankment repair to prevent seasonal 
floods) using a combination of machinery and human labour, 
as appropriate. Additionally, life skills training activities will be 
prioritised to increase household income for vulnerable and 
food insecure households. Community-based preparedness, 
surveillance and early warning systems/networks will 
contribute to preventing damage or losses to crops, livestock 
and coastal fisheries. Combined, these activities will directly 
benefit around 1 million people (IPC Phase 2-4) per month 
through conditional transfers (e.g. cash/food for the work/ 
training) and will indirectly benefit entire communities in rural 
and urban areas, including IDPs. 
Response Strategies and Modalities 
The Food Security Cluster will adopt the following key 
strategies to achieve its objectives: 
•Prioritise areas with severe acute food insecurity based on 
seasonal food and nutrition security assessments outcomes; 
•Regularly adapt the type and scale of response based on the 
severity of food insecurity, seasonality, livelihood and gender 
analysis; 
•Strengthen partners’ ability to target the people most in need, 
including socially marginalised groups, and improve partners’ 
accountability to affected populations; 
•Promote the common use of tools to facilitate beneficiary 
information management and the coordination of assistance to 
those most in need (e.g. SCOPE); 
•Scale-up assistance in hard-to-reach areas through 
strengthened engagement wih local authorities and NGOs; 
•Integrate protection risk mitigation measures throughout the 
design, implementation and monitoring of projects to ensure 
the most vulnerable are protected from exploitation and abuse; 
•Ensure that market analysis, harmonised transfer values and 
local coordination guide partners’ cash- and market-based 
responses; 
•Jointly analyse, plan and integrate Food Security Cluster 
responses with the Nutrition, WASH and Health Clusters, 
especially in areas with sustained high levels of acute food 
insecurity and malnutrition; 
•Strengthen partnership between UN and NGO resilience 
consortia to increase outreach and prevent vulnerable 
households from sliding to worse phases of food insecurity, and 
•Link humanitarian, early recovery and development efforts 
based on the RRF, and SDRF. 
Food Security Cluster partners will employ diverse response 
options for response, such as in-kind assistance, cash-based 
transfers, and the provision of basic services related to the 
livelihoods of affected people, depending on the severity and 
cause of acute food insecurity in a given area. The seasonal 
food security assessment, localised market assessments 
and monitoring inform the appropriate choice of response 
modalities. The Food Security Cluster has advised partners to 
use the Cash Working Group’s (CWG) recommended transfer 
value39. Overall, cash-based transfers continue to be the 
preferred modality of response to food assistance, as well as for 
livelihood support. The use of CBIs is preffered because of its 
contribution to enhancing of local production, stimulation of 
local markets, and the promotion of a people-centric approach 
in humanitarian response.

32 
PART II: health 
Overview/Cluster context 
Over 3 million people in Somalia need urgent 
action to assure their equitable and dignified 
access to health care and to maintain their 
right to health and wellbeing. IDPs, especially 
those displaced by conflict and those from 
minority groups, face barriers to accessing 
health services. People facing extreme food 
insecurity, malnutrition and poor access to 
clean water and sanitation are at particular 
risk to diarrhoeal and communicable 
diseases. Health security measures, including 
immunisation, are lacking in many areas. 
Furthermore, wellbeing and productivity 
are threatened by traumatic injury, noncommunicable 
illness and mental stress for 
which services are lacking that lack services to 
avert long-term harm. 
Targeting and response priorities/ 
boundaries 
The conflict affected population, especially 
those displaced by violence and natural 
disaster, are particularly vulnerable to 
discrimination, neglect, illness and injury, 
and, without intervention, face long-term 
morbidity or even death. The sector will target 
groups with specific vulnerabilities, including 
pregnant women, the disabled, the elderly 
and people suffering from chronic diseases. 
Health Cluster partners will prioritise the 
delivery of services to the most vulnerable 
and at risk due to violence including GBV 
survivors, marginalised groups, and those 
who face barriers to health services. Women 
and children are particularly at risk, especially 
during pregnancy, childbirth, and when a 
child is very young, and specialised services 
can prove crucial. Emergency and essential 
services must be not only available, but 
reachable and of good quality. 
Three areas of health risks, namely 
malnutrition, access to water and low 
immunisation, which often interact to 
worsen health and well-being, and must be 
targeted in order to reduce mortality and 
morbidity. Some of the most vulnerable need 
life-saving interventions for malnutrition 
and concomitant illness. Severe illness is 
also driven by (i)insufficient access to water, 
which leads to diarrhoeal disease, a concern 
given that 26 per cent of non-displaced and 
41 per cent of IDPs households reported 
having inadequate access to water in the 30 
days prior to the assessment, and (ii) poor 
overall vaccination rates, which average 
below 50 per cent, exposing the population 
to disease outbreaks. Beyond these threats, 
traumatic injury due to violence and other 
common occurrences, such as road accidents 
claim many lives and result in permanent 
disabilities. Those with physical disabilities 
and mental disorders face social isolation and 
lack of services. 
Response strategy and modalities 
The Health Cluster is committed to equitable 
access to emergency and essential healthcareservices. 
Partners will directly provide 
health services; in conjunction with national 
and local health authorities, by filling gaps in 
human resources, supplies and equipment. 
Mobile services will augment the capacity of 
static facilities, enabling health providers to 
50% 59 | 39| 2% 
PEOPLE IN NEED 
PEOPLE TARGETED 
FINANCIAL 
REQUIREMENTS 
1.2M 
50% 59 | 39| 2% 
92K 1.7M 
1M 39K 1.4M 
66K 
16K 
IDPs Refugees/ 
Asylum 
seekers 
Refugee 
Returnees 
Host 
Communities 
% female % children, 
adult, 
elderly* 
BY STATUS BY SEX & AGE 
*Children (<18 years old), adult 
$93M (18-59 years), elderly (>59 years) 
BREAKDOWN OF PEOPLE IN NEED AND TARGETED BY STATUS, SEX AND AGE 
Detailed sector response plan can be found at https://www.humanitarianresponse.info/en/ 
operations/somalia/health 
CONTACT 
Craig Hampton 
Cluster Coordinator 
hamptonc@who.int 
Dayib Ahmed 
Cluster co- 
Coordinator 
Dayib.Ahmed@ 
savethechildren.org 
PEOPLE IN NEED HEALTH 
3M 
REQUIREMENTS (US$) 
93M 
(>1% cash) 
PEOPLE TARGETED 
2.4M 
# OF PARTNERS 
62 
HEALTH OBJECTIVE 1: 1Improve equitable and safe 
access to quality emergency 
and essential lifesaving health 
services for crisis affected aimed at 
reducing avoidable morbidity and 
mortality. 
RELATES TO SO1, SO2, 
SO3 & SO4 
HEALTH OBJECTIVE 2: 2Mitigate impact and respond to 
shocks to the affected population 
as a result of conflict and public 
health emergencies 
RELATES TO SO1, SO2 & SO4

33 
PART II: health 
serve marginalised, nomadic and hard-to-reach communities. 
Integrated health, nutrition and WASH services will continue 
as a preferred modality, which will ease the burden of care on 
families. Health Partners will strengthen specialised services, 
specifically clinical management of rape and psychosocial 
support within the multi-sectoral approach to GBV; and 
ensure that survivors of violence are referred to complimentary 
services. The strengthening of disease surveillance, rapid 
response and case management remains a priority, including 
improved vaccination campaigns. Acute health services, such 
as trauma and maternal care must consider gaps in referral 
pathways between life-saving and rehabilitative care, and gaps 
in mental health care must also be addressed. 
Community engagement is key to improving the rates health 
services utilisation and disease prevention, especially among 
women and girls from minority clans. Improved accountability 
mechanisms with respect to marginalised and vulnerable 
populations will aim to identify and break-down barriers to 
health services. Improved accountability mechanisms must be 
matched by quality improvements in health care that ensure 
up-to-date knowledge and skills of medical practitioners and 
that services are provided in a safe and patient-rights centred 
environment. 
The Health Cluster continues to work closely with health 
authorities at the Federal and state levels to ensure that 
humanitarian action is aligned with local priorities and sector 
development strategies. Projects will integrate activities that 
build longer-term resilience and that scale-up the capacities 
needed to address public health challenges involving trauma 
and disease outbreaks. 
Photo: Qatar Red Crescent Society ( QRCS)

34 
PART II: nutrition 
NUTRITION 
Overview/summary of needs 
Acute Malnutrition remains the major 
problem that has persisted over time in 
Somalia, with high levels of GAM that are 
well above the emergency threshold of 15 per 
cent. During 2016 and 2017, the humanitarian 
situation in Somalia continued to deteriorate 
because of poor rains received during the 
consecutive Gu and Deyr seasons. The 
resulting drought caused widespread food 
insecurity, deepening health, nutritional and 
water and sanitation problems, which were 
exacerbated by the large-scale displacement 
of people. In response, the Nutrition Cluster, 
alongside other humanitarian clusters, 
developed a pre-famine response plan that 
addressed operational systems, staffing and 
supplies management in a holistic manner, 
all building on work underway and already 
scaled up in 2016. The increased response 
across clusters supported health and nutrition 
service delivery, the accessibility of safe water 
and sanitation, and reinvigorated protection 
services, after a slight hiatus. Meanwhile, 
continued continued support was given 
to children sustained emergency nutrition 
interventions, which were given a fresh 
perspective from the emergency processes. 
In 2018, the overall food security situation 
in Somalia improved in comparison to the 
previous year, as demonstrated in the latest 
food security and nutrition assessment by 
FSNAU40. The improvement is due to the 
above-average performance of the April to June 
2018 Gu rains. However, these gains have not 
translated into corresponding improvements 
in the nutrition situation and categorically, 
malnutrition situation remains of serious 
concern. Recent nutrition surveys41 across the 
country indicate slight improvements in a few 
areas and a stagnated nutrition situation in 
most parts of the country. The trends in GAM 
prevalence(WHZ) across the country have 
remained at serious levels, in comparison to 
six months ago. This is further evidenced by 
the high admission rates to in nutrition sites/ 
centres over the 12 months during 2018, 
and as well as compared to similar months 
in previous years of 2016 and 2017. The 
comparison has been done only at all time 
operational (fixed) sites functional over the 
years otherwise the highest ever admission is 
recorded in 2017 due to large scale prefamine 
response operation. 
Targeting and response priorities 
Providing their high susceptibility to death, 
the Nutrtion Cluster will target 100 per cent 
of all 177,534 severely malnourished boys 
and girls under the age of five with lifesaving 
therapeutic interventions. Moreover, we 
will target moderately malnourished boys 
and girls under the age of five, and Pregnant 
and Lactating Women (PLW) who are 
affected by moderate acute malnutrition. The 
response priority will follow the GAM rate 
and the overall burden in terms geographic 
prioritisation, while individual objective 
measurements (anthropometry) will be used 
in targeting cases with a package of lifesaving 
services. As well targeting boys and 
girls under the age of two and pregnant and 
lactating women (PLW) with food-based 
therapeutic nutrition services during periods 
of lean seasons. 
50% 59 | 39| 2% 
PEOPLE IN NEED 
PEOPLE TARGETED 
FINANCIAL 
REQUIREMENTS 
364K 
50% 59 | 39| 2% 
- 1.1M 
364K - 764K 
20K 
10K 
IDPs Refugees/ 
Asylum 
seekers 
Refugee 
Returnees 
Host 
Communities 
% female % children, 
adult, 
elderly* 
BY STATUS BY SEX & AGE 
*Children (<18 years old), adult 
$178M (18-59 years), elderly (>59 years) 
BREAKDOWN OF PEOPLE IN NEED AND TARGETED BY STATUS, SEX AND AGE 
Detailed sector response plan can be found at https://www.humanitarianresponse.info/en/ 
operations/somalia/nutrition 
PEOPLE IN NEED 
1.5M 
REQUIREMENTS (US$) 
178M 
(>1% cash) 
PEOPLE TARGETED 
1.1M 
# OF PARTNERS 
74 
NUTRITION OBJECTIVE 1: 1Strengthen lifesaving preventive 
nutrition services for vulnerable 
population groups focusing 
on appropriate infant and young 
child feeding practices in emergency, 
micronutrient interventions and 
optimal maternal nutritio. 
RELATES TO SO1 
NUTRITION OBJECTIVE 2: 2Improve equitable access to 
quality lifesaving curative 
nutrition services through 
systematic identification, referral and 
treatment of acutely malnourished 
cases 
RELATES TO SO1, SO4 
NUTRITION OBJECTIVE 3: 3Strengthening robust evidence 
based system for Nutrition with 
capacity in decision making to 
inform need based programming. 
RELATES TO SO2 
NUTRITION OBJECTIVE 4: 4Establish integrated nutrition 
programs between and across 
relevant sectors through 
enhanced coordination and joint 
programming including nutrition 
sensitive actions 
RELATES TO SO2 
CONTACT 
Samson Desie 
Cluster Coordinator 
sdesie@unicef.org 
Naema Hirad 
Deputy Cluster 
Coordinator 
naema.hirad@wfp.org

35 
PART II: nutrition 
The key Response Activities to be prioritised would include 
the regular identification of acutely malnourished children 
and PLW, including through the Mothers MUAC approach, 
and therapeutic feeding support for the treatment of acute 
malnutrition cases. The Nutrition Cluster will also promote 
and advocate with all development and humanitarian actors for 
prioritisation and implementation of micronutrient support to 
vulnerable groups, such as PLW and children under age five. 
Examples of support include the provision of Vitamin A & 
MMN, food-based and non-food based preventive actions, 
including nutrition sensitive activities and integrated multisectoral 
Nutrition, Health, and Hygiene P reventative Care 
(NHHP), food security and promotional support, and MCHN/ 
IYCF-E support (promotional and preventative), and especially 
support to caregivers. The Cluster will continue to support cash 
based interventions to support preventative activities, to address 
root causes of malnutrition at household level and to support 
treatment outcomes. Cash based interventions, especially those 
targeting households with children under the age of five, can 
significantly contribute to overall resilience/livelihood and/or 
wellbeing of the families, ultimately impacting dietary diversity 
& frequency positively. 
Response strategy and modalities 
The Nutrition Cluster will focus on basic life-saving activities 
and community resilience-building activities in priority 
hotspot geographical areas, including all locations with 
high GAM and Severe Acute Malnutrition (SAM) rates and 
IDP areas. In addition, the Nutrition Cluster will promote 
preventive nutrition programmes across the country, using 
a mix of strategies focusing on both nutrition specific and 
nutrition sensitive actions in an integrated manner. In the 2019 
HRP, the Nutrition Cluster will build upon current successes 
and achievements and will support the Government and other 
implementing partners to enhance equitable access to and 
utilisation of quality, high impact mother and child nutrition 
interventions. Such interventions will result in a reduction 
of acute malnutrition and will contribute to lowering, child 
mortality and morbidity, with the aim of achieving the 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). 
Equal access to basic nutrition services across the country will 
be ensured using a combination of strategies and approaches, 
including a multi-sectoral approach, nutrition sensitive, 
and nutrition specific service delivery through mobile and 
static services. There will be greater and equal focus on the 
promotion of multi-sectoral approaches to (i) emergency 
nutrition, (ii) building the resilience of mothers, caregivers 
and communities to promote preventive behaviors, and (iii) 
a diversified mix of nutrition sensitive and nutrition specific 
actions. The Nutrition Cluster also aspires to develop the 
capacity of the Somali Authorities, and local and international 
actors to enable them to steadily lead and manage different 
components of the emergency nutrition response plan. Given 
the complex and interconnected causes of malnutrition, multisectoral 
and integrated approach is at the heart this strategy, 
stressing the importance of involving multiple sectors in 
addressing malnutrition. Therefore, sustainable solutions 
require coordination and integration with Health, WASH, 
Food Security, Agriculture and Social Protection partners, 
among others. 
Malnutrition is an outcome indicator that highlights 
needs in several sectors and in the overall vulnerability of 
communities. In Somalia, the key drivers of malnutrition are 
linked to protection concerns. The critical prevalence of acute 
malnutrition has persisted among some displaced populations, 
and most notably IDPs that have been located in Garowe 
and Galkacyo since the 2012 Gu season, and among IDPs in 
Qardho and Mogadishu since 2016 the Deyr season. This is 
partly attributed to high morbidity and inconsistent household 
income, as reflected in poor diet diversity and infant and young 
child feeding behaviours. Equally important factors that affect 
nutritional outcomes are (i) insufficient health services, (ii) 
climatic hazards, (iii) internal displacement from rural areas due 
to armed conflict and/or climate shocks, and (iv) the growing 
trend of the forced eviction of IDPs, which leaves families with 
poor housing structures, and limited sanitation and hygiene 
facilities. Similarly, as indicated in the Somalia 2016 IYCF Study 
Somali children are at higher risk of nutritional deprivation 
including those living in a poor household headed by a male, or 
those under the care of a young mother42. While mothers are 
away from the household in search of casual labour, children 
and infants are left without proper care. 
Given the complex nature of causality, and the heavy burden 
of malnutrition, considering the high susceptibility of 
malnourished children to death, it is of paramount importance 
to put collective, multi-sectoral and integrated efforts into the 
prevention and treatment of malnutrition. It is also imperative 
to protect households by building resilience to minor shocks and 
alleviating economic hardship by preserving vital and limited 
assets. Preventative programs that circumvent malnutrition 
through early action interventions to those who are most at 
risk are essential. Over one million children and pregnant and 
nursing women would benefit from life-saving, preventative 
nutrition programs that aim to break the intergenerational 
cycle of hunger. Hence, the priorities for 2019 remain focused 
on response programming that is both nutrition specific and 
nutrition sensitive. Furthermore, the Nutrition Cluster will 
continue to holistically consider the perspectives of protection, 
gender, and accountability to affected populations in the overall 
response. 

36 
PART II: protection 
Overview/Cluster context 
The situation of people affected by displacement 
and disasters remains precarious with respect 
to physical safety and dignity. As a result of 
destitution, women, men, girls and boys, are 
exposed to particular and various forms of 
violence, exploitation and discrimination. 
Frequent protection risks reported on the 
ground include (i) GBV, (ii) forced evictions 
(see graphs below), (iii) exposure to explosive 
hazards and (iv) child rights violations, such as 
child recruitment by armed groups and early 
marriage. Displacement increases the risk of 
family separation, and currently, there is an 
estimated caseload of 8,000 unaccompanied or 
separated children in Somalia. Furthermore, 
due to the loss of men’s livelihoods, displaced 
women are increasingly taking on the role 
of breadwinners, which exposes them to 
the increased risk of domestic violence, 
exploitation and abuse. 
Targeting and response priorities/ 
boundaries 
Of the 2.6 million people in need of 
protection services there are varying levels of 
vulnerability within the affected community, 
by age, gender and other factors, such as 
disability or clan affiliation. Considering the 
level of funding in the 2018 HRP, ongoing 
access challenges and operational capacity, 
the Protection Cluster will prioritise the 
provision of protection services to vulnerable 
people in newly displaced communities, 
displaced people in IPC 243, and among host 
communities. Interventions will further be 
prioritised based on rates of child recruitment, 
eviction, displacement from conflict areas, 
malnutrition, and the ratio of displacement 
against the total population. 
Response strategy and modalities 
The Protection Cluster, and its sub-clusters 
(i) Child Protection in Emergencies, (ii) 
Gender-Based Violence, (iii) Housing, Land 
and Property, and (iv) Explosive Hazards will 
respond to the emergency protection needs 
of vulnerable members of disaster-affected 
displaced communities. The Protection 
Cluster will ensure that victims of serious 
protection violations have access to essential 
protection services, including healthcare, 
psychosocial support, or other related 
protection life-saving assistance. 
Protection partners will support the capacity 
of protection stakeholders in addressing 
protection needs, and will primarily engage 
communities and related institutions such 
as the Federal and state governments, and 
regional protection services. At the community 
level, partners will reinforce the capacity of 
committees or other networks to perform key 
protection functions. Community protection 
functions include the identification and 
referral of people in need to protection 
services, such as women and children at risk, 
people with disabilities, those with injuries 
and chronic illnesses, the elderly and people 
with psychological distress. Support for the 
recovery and reintegration of victims into 
communities will be provided. Awarenessraising 
among communities about protection 
51% 63| 33| 4% 
PEOPLE IN NEED 
PEOPLE TARGETED 
FINANCIAL 
REQUIREMENTS 
1.9M 
51% 63 | 33| 4% 
92K 566K 
1.1M - 276K 
39K 
39K 
IDPs Refugees/ 
Asylum 
seekers 
Refugee 
Returnees 
Host 
Communities 
% female % children, 
adult, 
elderly* 
BY STATUS BY SEX & AGE 
*Children (<18 years old), adult 
$84M (18-59 years), elderly (>59 years) 
BREAKDOWN OF PEOPLE IN NEED AND TARGETED BY STATUS, SEX AND AGE 
Detailed sector response plan can be found at Detailed sector response plan can be found at 
https://www.humanitarianresponse.info/en/operations/somalia/protection 
PEOPLE IN NEED PROTECTION 
2.6M 
REQUIREMENTS (US$) 
84M 
(8% cash) 
PEOPLE TARGETED 
1.4M 
# OF PARTNERS 
51 
PROTECTION OBJECTIVE 1: 1Address acute protection needs 
of women, men, girls and 
boys, stemming from violence, 
including GBV, as well as coercion, and 
abuse 
RELATES TO SO1 & SO2 
PROTECTION OBJECTIVE 2: 2Strengthen resilience of 
individuals, communities and 
institutions exposed to protection 
risks, and prevent further abuse. 
RELATES TO SO2 & SO4 
PROTECTION OBJECTIVE 3: 3Strengthen the coordination of 
protection services and enhance 
protection advocacy with relevant 
stakeholders. 
RELATES TO SO1, SO2 & SO4 
CONTACT 
Christophe Beau 
Cluster Coordinator 
beau@unhcr.org

37 
PART II: protection 
risks, rights and services will be continued. Communities will 
be supported to develop community prevention plans and 
facilitate peaceful coexistence. 
The coordination of protection services will be strengthened 
to ensure that evidence-based advocacy can be conducted 
regarding protection concerns. In particular, this requires 
the reinforcement of protection monitoring and information 
management systems, and advocacy for protection 
mainstreaming in humanitarian response. The coordination 
of protection services will further aim at ensuring that referral 
pathways are in place, especially for GBV survivors and victims 
of child abuse. 
Child Protection 
Child protection partners will provide integrated Child 
Protection Case management services to at least 15,000 
children including Unaccompanied and Separated Children 
(UASC), and other vulnerable children in need of immediate 
support. Emphasis will be placed on the prevention of family 
separation and effectively responding to the specific needs of 
identified UASC through (i) identification documentation, (ii) 
the provision of immediate care or referral, (iii) family tracing 
and reunification, and (iv) the provision of alternative care. 
Building on the existing community based Child Protection 
(CP) mechanisms, the Child Protection Sub-cluster will 
continue to provide gender and age appropriate psychosocial 
support services for boys, girls and their caregivers. In 
addition, the Child Protection Sub-Cluster will strengthen the 
provision of inclusive, community-based reintegration services 
for children who are associated with armed forces and groups, 
or those at risk. This community-based approach will not only 
ensure that CP services are brought closer to those in need, but 
will also expand the reach of services. 
The Child Protection Sub-Cluster will target over 450,000 
community members with a wide range of awareness raising 
activities on child protection concerns, including the prevention 
of family separation, recruitment, and Mine Risk Education. 
Schools, food distribution, nutrition and health facilities, 
among others, will be used as platforms to raise awareness 
about child protection issues. In addition, the Child Protection 
Sub-Cluster will implement a robust capacity building plan for 
government, community based-structures and child protection 
actors to facilitate compliance with the minimum standards for 
child protection in Humanitarian Action44. 
Gender-Based Violence 
GBV partners will broaden the scope of life-saving services by 
expanding geographical reach and improving service quality. 
The provision of comprehensive services will be scaled up, 
including (i) GBV case management, (ii) psychological first aid 
ans support accompanied by referrals for appropriate services, 
(iii) the expansion and strengthening of referral services, (iv) 
the provision of critical material support, (v) livelihood training 
opportunities, and (vi) GBV mobile response for hard-to-reach 
communities. 
In support of the recovery and resilience of GBV survivors and 
of women and girls at risk of GBV, GBV partners will provide 
livelihood training opportunities, and will establish and 
support safe spaces for women and girls. In addition, partners 
will work with men and boys to mobilise them against GBV. 
The capacity of service providers at the national, sub-national 
and community levels will be strengthened in the prevention 
of and response to incidents of GBV. In particular, GBV 
partners will promote the mainstreaming of GBV response and 
prevention in humanitarian response and reporting. 
Housing Land Property 
Partners will mitigate protection risks that are exacerbated by 
evictions through provision of different forms of tenure security 
support, including facilitating the issuance of documentation 
at the household and group levels. Partners will engage 
proactively with relevant stakeholders to negotiate improved 
tenure arrangements and/or facilitate dignified relocations. 
Extremely vulnerable victims of evictions will be supported in 
coping with Post-Eviction Stress (PES) through the provision 
of multi-sectoral cash assistance, specialised counselling and 
legal assistance services. 
Access to information will be facilitated to assist IDPs in 
accessing services, navigating complex procedures, and 
excersing existing remedies. Particular efforts will be made 
to mobilise and support the government’s efforts to address 
evictions, including robust engagement with landlords, 
gatekeepers and community leaders. Eviction monitoring and 
eviction risk mapping will be strengthened to enhance analysis, 
prevention and advocacy. 
Explosive Hazards 
The capacities of the FGS and Federal Member States will be 
reinforced to ensure (i) victim assistance, and clearance and 
risk education in areas that are contaminated by landmines and 
other explosive hazards that pose a threat to local communities 
and hamper the delivery of humanitarian aid, (ii) strengthened 
coordination and management of humanitarian mine action 
activities, and (iii) enhanced Explosive Ordnance Disposal 
(EOD) capabilities of Somali Police and other governmental 
and non-governmental mine action partners. 
At the local level, training will be provided to 300 focal points 
among humanitarian organisations that are supporting 
vulnerable groups, to facilitate the implementation of 
explosive hazard management interventions. Particular focus 
will be given to landmines/ERW risk education, and local 
referral mechanisms to mine action service providers, such 
as the Somalia Explosive Management Authority (SEMA), 
police, and survivors’ assistance organisations. Furthermore, 
disability awareness will be raised among local authorities and 
humanitarian partners. 

38 
PART II: shelter & NFI 
SHELTER & NFI 
Overview/Cluster context 
Most IDPs are currently residing in informal 
crowded settlements, with insufficient access 
to basic services and under poor shelter 
conditions that raise protection and health, 
and privacy and dignity concerns. 
In 2018, various assessments conducted 
across Somalia demonstrate that 80 per cent 
of IDPs live in makeshift shelters, temporary 
emergency shelters, tents, or under trees. 
Furthermore, 35 per cent have suffered 
damage to their shelters in the last three 
months, 16 per cent reported thefts from 
shelters, and 80 per cent were NFI vulnerable. 
Shelters made of simple materials provide 
little/no protection from outside threats, 
which has led to the perpetration of rape and 
other forms of GBV, especially among femaleled 
households45. Overcrowding has forced 
multiple families to live in the same shelter 
without any kind of separation, which has 
led to additional protection concerns. They 
remain in need of improved shelter and NFI 
support to provide protection from harsh 
climatic conditions, overall improvements in 
living conditions, and increased opportunities 
to access livelihoods and durable solutions. 
Targeting and response priorities and 
boundaries 
The Shelter Cluster will mainly target IDPs 
living in informal urban and peri-urban 
settlements. In order to reduce tensions, 
between ten per cent and 20 per cent of host 
community members will also be targeted, 
and in addition, the entire refugee returnee 
caseload will be targeted. The FSNAU SADD 
population estimate, JMCNA and several 
cluster partners across Somalia provides a 
breakdown of the IDP population in terms of 
age and gender. 
The Shelter Cluster will prioritise the delivery 
of aid to locations that have a high number of 
IDPs and that are accessible to humanitarian 
actors. The most vulnerable of the affected 
population will be prioritised. Among the 
most vulnerable are (i) female or child headed 
households, (ii) households from minority 
clans, (iii) extremely poor households, and 
(iv) households that have a large household 
sise, disabled family members, pregnant and 
lactating mothers, and children under five 
years old. 
The Shelter Cluster has defined the people 
in need of shelter as strictly those who are 
internally displaced or are refugees returning 
to the country. This definition facilitates the 
provision of life-saving emergency response to 
the newly displaced and transitional assistance 
to those facing protracted displacement. 
Transitional assistance should be sustainable 
and designed to catalyse durable solutions to 
displacement. 
Response strategy and modalities 
The Shelter Cluster will continue to support 
crisis and displacement affected populations, 
through the provision of life-saving 
emergency shelter and NFIs. Transitional 
and permanent shelter support will also be 
considered, after due consideration of the 
phase of displacement, the prevailing security 
51% 61| 37| 2% 
PEOPLE IN NEED 
PEOPLE TARGETED 
FINANCIAL 
REQUIREMENTS 
2M 
51% 61 | 37| 2% 
75K 224K 
1.4M 41.5K 142K 
-
- 
IDPs Refugees/ 
Asylum 
seekers 
Refugee 
Returnees 
Host 
Communities 
% female % children, 
adult, 
elderly* 
BY STATUS BY SEX & AGE 
*Children (<18 years old), adult 
$64M (18-59 years), elderly (>59 years) 
BREAKDOWN OF PEOPLE IN NEED AND TARGETED BY STATUS, SEX AND AGE 
Detailed sector response plan can be found at at https://www.sheltercluster.org/response/ 
national-cluster 
PEOPLE IN NEED 
2.3M 
REQUIREMENTS (US$) 
64M 
(34% cash) 
PEOPLE TARGETED 
1.6M 
# OF PARTNERS 
19 
SHELTER OBJECTIVE 1: 1Contribute to the protection of 
newly displaced people, IDPs / 
refugee returns / host community 
and those affected by natural hazards. 
RELATES TO SO1, SO3 
SHELTER OBJECTIVE 2: 2Improve the living conditions 
and contribute to local 
reintegration of the protracted 
internally displaced persons (IDPs) and 
refugees returning back to their place 
of origin.RELATES TO SO3& SO4 
SHELTER OBJECTIVE 3: 3Improve the quality of 
shelter assistance and ensure 
accountability through effective 
mechanismsRELATES TO SO1, SO3 
& SO4 
CONTACT 
Nurta Adan 
Cluster Coordinator 
adan@unhcr.org

39 
PART II: shelter & NFI 
of land tenure, and the possibility to catalyse durable solutions 
through sustainable access to basic services. To this end, the 
Shelter Cluster will promote integrated humanitarian response. 
The Shelter Cluster aims to use combined approaches in the 
delivery of assistance to the targeted population, including 
both in-kind and cash assistance. For each location and group, 
the modality used will be determined on the basis of market 
assessments and analyses. However, shelter partners have 
made a commitment to deliver more than half of all shelter 
assistance and NFIs through conditional and unconditional 
cash and vouchers. Beneficiary use CBIs in local markets can 
serve to diversify and strengthen local resources, stimulate the 
economy, and support livelihood opportunities. Where in-kind 
assistance is preferred, the Shelter Cluster will advocate for the 
allocation of complementary cash assistance amounting to 
approximately ten per cent of the total value of the assistance. 
Such allocation will enable beneficiaries to purchase items or 
components that may be missing from, or needed in addition 
to, the assistance provided. 
Furthermore, the Shelter Cluster will endavour to improve 
emergency response time by promoting the establishment of a 
pipeline system. To expedite the delivery of aid in emergencies, 
the Shelter Cluster shall leverage on established logistic and 
supply chain arrangements and prepositioning of supplies at 
strategic locations. 
Internal displacement is the key driver of humanitarian shelter 
needs in Somalia. It has been observed through the cluster 
partners report and OCHA that there is no difference in the 
shelter needs of IDPs displaced by either conflict or by drought. 
However, there have been increasing needs for shelter and 
NFIs due to the unprecedented displacement that took place in 
2017 and 2018. Accordingly, the Shelter Cluster will continue 
to maintain focus on providing life-saving and life-sustaining 
assistance to (i) IDPs living in settlements, (ii) refugee 
returnees, (iii) locally integrated IDPs, and (iv) vulnerable 
host communities. The majority of IDPs are hosted in urban 
and peri-urban areas, concentrated around Mogadishu, 
Baidoa, Kismayo and Gaalkacyo. The Shelter Cluster will give 
marginalised communities special attention in order to lower 
their risk of exclusion, especially with regard to HLP, and 
exploitation by gatekeepers. 
The Shelter Cluster will promote partners’ consultation with 
the community with regard to the design and implementation 
of shelter assistance. Partners will be required to report on 
how community consultations are conducted, and how the 
special needs of women and children have been taken into 
consideration in delivery of assistance. All reporting will be 
required to include disaggregated information on beneficiaries 
in terms of age and gender. 
As evictions and HLP concerns continue to be major 
impediments to the provision of shelter, the Shelter Cluster 
will work closely with the Protection Cluster to build the 
capacity of shelter actors who encounter HLP issues first hand. 
Such activities will aim to improve the capacity of settlement 
managers and individual households to negotiate appropriate 
land use and rental agreements. Partners will work more closely 
with the local authorities to simplify and legitimise any tenure 
agreements reached between beneficiaries and land owners. 
Photo: Max Schott/UNOCHA

40 
PART II: water , sanitation an d hygiene 
Overview/Cluster context 
Unreliable access to temporary and/or 
inadequate Water, Sanitation and Hygiene 
(WASH) facilities remains an important feature 
of the humanitarian landscape in Somalia. 
As a consequence of recent displacement, 
repeated disasters, and a chronic lack of 
investment in durable WASH solutions, the 
Somali people are exposed to all categories 
of WASH-related public health threats. In 
total, 2.9 million people need emergency 
WASH assistance. IDP communities, host 
populations in rural areas that are at risk of 
drought and those living in districts prone 
to disasters and disease outbreaks are among 
the most vulnerable. In addition, the safety of 
people, particularly women and children, in 
accessing latrines and water points remains a 
serious risk for exposure to violence. 
Targeting and response priorities/ 
boundaries 
Target populations for humanitarian response 
were identified based on limited levels of access 
to water and sanitation facilities, and poor 
compliance with hygiene practices in both 
IDP settlements and in host communities, 
across urban and sub-urban or rural contexts. 
Targeting criteria related to (i) food security 
and malnutrition, for those in IPC 3 to 5, 
(ii) health, considering AWD prevalence and 
attack rates, (iii) vulnerability to disasters 
and (iv) protection with respect to the latrine 
safety index and distance to water points, 
were used to further narrow the analysis and 
identify strategic locations and communities 
for the delivery of services . 
In 2019, the riverine regions of Hiraan, 
Middle Shabelle, Gedo and Lower Juba are 
prioritised, as most acute needs resulting 
from floods were insufficiently addressed in 
2018. Prioritisation is also given to recently 
established IDP settlements with low WASH 
coverage in crowded urban and sub-urban 
settings, such as in Banadir, Baidoa, and 
Kismayo among others46. Populations in the 
most chronically underserved locations are 
also prioritised for sustainable solutions, 
particularly with respect to historical hotspots 
for AWD/Cholera, persistent pockets of 
drought and long-term IDP settlements. 
Response strategy and modalities 
In times of WASH-related disease outbreaks 
and/or the sudden onset of disaster, with or 
without population displacement, WASH 
partners will deliver temporary emergency 
services to address life-saving needs and 
reduce the burden of WASH-related mortality 
and morbidity. 
In long-term IDP settlements, localised 
pockets of drought, and historical AWD/ 
Cholera hotspots, within humanitarian 
boundaries established by the WASH Cluster, 
partners will deliver sustainable WASH 
solutions when feasible to progressively 
improve the water and sanitation ladder. 
WASH Cluster partners will further contribute 
to health, nutrition and education outcomes 
by ensuring access to essential WASH services 
in health facilities of all types and in schools. 
WASH services will continue to be delivered 
under a strong protection lens, which involves, 
among other efforts, ensuring that latrines 
50% 55| 43| 2% 
PEOPLE IN NEED 
PEOPLE TARGETED 
FINANCIAL 
REQUIREMENTS 
1.5M 
50% 55 | 43| 2% 
92K 1.3M 
1.4M 41.5K 1.1M 
-
- 
IDPs Refugees/ 
Asylum 
seekers 
Refugee 
Returnees 
Host 
Communities 
% female % children, 
adult, 
elderly* 
BY STATUS BY SEX & AGE 
*Children (<18 years old), adult 
$104M (18-59 years), elderly (>59 years) 
BREAKDOWN OF PEOPLE IN NEED AND TARGETED BY STATUS, SEX AND AGE 
Detailed sector response plan can be found at https://www.humanitarianresponse.info/fr/ 
operations/somalia/somalia-wash-cluster 
PEOPLE IN NEED WATER, SANITATION AND HYGIENE 
2.9M 
REQUIREMENTS (US$) 
104M 
(14% cash) 
PEOPLE TARGETED 
2.6M 
# OF PARTNERS 
54 
WASH OBJECTIVE 1: 1Deliver life-saving WASH 
assistance to reduce acute needs 
among the most vulnerable 
settlements and communities. 
RELATES TO SO1 & SO2 
WASH OBJECTIVE 2: 2Reduce risk of violence against 
women, children and vulnerable 
groups when accessing WASH 
services. 
RELATES TO SO3 
WASH OBJECTIVE 3: 3Provide or restore sustainable 
access to safe water and 
adequate sanitation services in 
targeted communities and institutions. 
RELATES TO SO1, SO2, SO3 & SO4 
CONTACT 
Frederic Patigny 
Cluster Coordinator 
fpatigny@unicef.org 
Mohamed Ali Isak 
Cluster Support 
Officer 
miali@unicef.org

41 
PART II: water , sanitation an d hygiene 
and bathing facilities are gender separated, are provided with 
lockable doors, have sufficient lighting at night, and the distance 
to water points is reduced to within the agreed standards. 
Where feasible and adequate, the WASH Cluster’s partners 
contribute to building local WASH markets, and to enhancing 
the use of Market Based Programming (MBP) and CBIs. Such 
modalities are developed beyond water trucking, and include, 
for examble, the for desludging of latrines and septic tanks, and 
repair and improvement of minor water infrastructures. 
The WASH Cluster will strengthen its capacity to deliver against 
its core functions. The 6 (+1) core functions strategy47, including 
its related action plan, is the key reference document, outlining 
the tools to be developed and operationalised by the WASH 
Cluster in 2019. The strategy includes, non-exhaustively, an 
accountability framework, an inter-agency contingency plan, 
plans to strengthen the data collection and analysis process and 
a new information management framework. 
Photo: WASH/UNICEF

42 
PART II: multi-sectora l assistance 
MULTI-SECTORAL ASSISTANCE 
Overview 
In 2018, a key priority in humanitarian 
response was to improve the implementation 
of a multi-sectoral response, and to ensure 
that services more effectively addressed 
potential protection risks. For example, as 
part of the flood response in early-mid 2018, 
improved integration was developed through 
various complementary approaches, including 
through (i) the scale-up of multipurpose 
cash programming, (ii) the deployment 
of Integrated Emergency Response Teams 
(IERTs) to respond to the AWD/Cholera 
outbreak, (iii) the support of the DOCCs in 
Mogadishu, Baidoa and Garowe, and (iv) 
increased nutrition-sensitive, multi-sectoral 
programming. Furthermore, two rounds of 
allocations from the SHF also ensured greater 
integration across clusters and catalysed 
integration across the system. 
Disaster Operations and Coordination 
Centres (DOCC) 
As part of the famine prevention efforts, 
humanitarian partners established three 
Drought Operations Coordination Centres 
(DOCCs) in early 2017. Owing to the impact 
which the DOCC concept had on those 
efforts, these forums were transformed into 
Disaster Operations Coordination Centers 
in 2018, in recognition of their ability to 
respond to all forms of disaster in Somalia. 
The DOCC mechanism involves multiple 
cluster representatives working from the same 
space, which enhances information sharing 
and coordination between all humanitarian 
actors in the country. It also allows for the 
possibility of joint mission planning, as is 
evidenced by the four successful DOCC 
assessment missions which took place across 
Somalia in 2018. In 2019, it is anticipated that 
the mechanism will be enhanced, to further 
prioritise joint assessment and preparedness 
planning, while also continuing to adapt and 
grow to meet operational requirements. 
Multipurpose Cash 
Multi-Purpose Cash Assistance (MPCA) in 
Somalia opened possibilities for enhanced 
collaboration among technical sector 
specialists and cash experts. The use of multiwallet 
approaches is becoming increasingly 
common in Somalia as it has helped agencies 
and sectors to collaborate better together to 
avoid duplications when responding to the 
diverse needs of the minimum expenditure 
basket (MEB). In Somalia, MPCA have 
been delivered through a range of emerging 
financial services including prepaid cards, 
mobile money transfers and Hawalas. The 
CWG and ICCG work closely together to 
coordinate the delivery of MPCA to ensure 
the complementarity of this support with inkind 
and sectoral cash assistance. 
Regular Market monitoring activities are 
conducted on a monthly basis to evaluate 
the impact of cash in the local economy 
and to ascertain that MPCA transfer values 
continue to adequately meet the needs of the 
targeted population. In addition, regular post 
disctribution monitoring (PDM) assessment 
are conducted by partners to continuously 
examine the impact of MPCA and assess its 
outcome against on sectoral indicators 
In Somalia, MPCA is proven to be an effective 
tool to shelp identifying sustainable linkages 
of humanitarian cash transfers with longerterm 
resilience and development assistance. 
The CWG is commited to work closely with 
ICCG to increase quality and effectiveness of 
cash coordination to support a principled and 
holistic humanitarian assistance. 
CONTACT 
Justin Brady 
OCHA Head of Office 
bradyj@un.org 
REQUIREMENTS (US$) 
39M 
(75% cash) 
# OF PARTNERS 
4 
MULTI-SECTORIAL ASSISTANCE 
OBJECTIVE 1: 1Strengthen integrated multisectoral 
response, to ensure 
that delivery of humanitarian 
response is people-centric and 
addresses those most vulnerable. 
RELATES TO SO1 
MULTI-SECTORIAL ASSISTANCE 
OBJECTIVE 2: 2Provide multi-purpose cash 
assistance (MPCA) for highly 
vulnerable people (displaced 
during the year or newly displaced) 
in priority locations with functioning 
markets. 
RELATES TO SO4

43 
PART II: Refugee response plan 
PEOPLE IN NEED REFUGEE RESPONSE PLAN 
131K 
REQUIREMENTS (US$) 
58M 
(70% cash) 
PEOPLE TARGETED 
81K 
# OF PARTNERS 
30 
Overview 
In 2019, the protection environment in 
Somalia is expected to remain fragile, creating 
challenges for persons seeking international 
protection in the country. The response 
strategy is geared towards providing lifesaving 
assistance to over 39,000 refugees 
and asylum-seekers, mostly originating 
from Ethiopia and Yemen. The absence of a 
comprehensive and up-to-date federal legal 
and policy framework for refugee protection 
increases their vulnerability considerably. All 
refugees and asylum-seekers live in urban or 
peri-urban areas amongst the host community, 
with a significant proportion residing in 
areas housing the urban poor. Refugees and 
asylum-seekers face a range of protection 
problems, including xenophobia, risk of 
refoulement, arbitrary arrest and detention, 
sexual violence, exploitation and abuse, and 
discrimination with regard to access to justice 
and to the already limited basic services and 
livelihood opportunities. 
Targeting and response priorities/ 
boundaries 
The Refugee Response Plan is based on an 
inclusive, community-centred and rightsbased 
approach, which aims to maximise 
the protection impact of planned activities. 
For instance, in addressing sexual and 
gender-based violence, community-based 
outreach mechanisms will be applied while 
strengthening referral pathways to existing 
response and support systems where refugees 
and asylum-seekers reside. Activities 
implemented to protect and assist refugees 
and asylum-seekers in Somalia also cover host 
communities, which creates improved mutual 
understanding and trust. A combination of 
lack of livelihood opportunities and instability 
including the cyclical natural disasters such 
as droughts and floods have increased the 
vulnerability of refugees and asylum-seekers 
as well as their host communities. Accordingly, 
refugee response partners must continue lifesaving 
and multi-sectoral assistance projects 
targeting the most vulnerable, especially 
addressing food security, health, education, 
and shelter needs. 
There is also a need to pursue a progressive 
approach to durable solutions by ensuring 
that refugees and asylum-seekers are included 
in national services and basic services. In line 
with the ‘whole-of-society’ approach of the 
Comprehensive Refugee Response Framework 
(CRRF)48, UNHCR and its partners work in 
close collaboration to promote comprehensive 
durable solutions for the Somali refugee 
situation among the host communities under 
the leadership of the Government of Somalia. 
Skills training and other livelihood initiatives 
will be promoted to minimise dependency on 
humanitarian aid, enhance self-reliance, and 
provide linkages with opportunities arising 
from the National Development Plan (NDP). 
Response strategy and modalities 
Prioritised activities of the protection-focused 
refugee response within Somalia are: (i) multisectoral, 
rights-based, life-saving protection 
assistance including legal interventions to 
address legal and physical protection risks, 
(ii) improved registration, identity, and civil 
status documentation, and targeted Refugee 
Status Determination (RSD), (ii) promotion 
of refugees’ access to and their integration in 
national systems, in particular basic services 
BREAKDOWN OF PEOPLE IN NEED AND TARGETED BY STATUS, SEX AND AGE 
Detailed refugee response plan can be found at http://reporting.unhcr.org/node/2550 
CONTACT 
Takeshi Moriyama 
UNHCR Deputy 
Representative 
moriyama@unhcr.org 
REFUGEE RESPONSE OBJECTIVE 1: 1Favorable Protection 
Environment and Durable 
Solutions RELATES TO SO3 
& SO4 
REFUGEE RESPONSE OBJECTIVE 2: 2Fair Protection Processes and 
Documentation RELATES TO 
SO3 
REFUGEE RESPONSE OBJECTIVE 3: 3Security from Violence and 
Exploitation 
RELATES TO SO3 
REFUGEE RESPONSE OBJECTIVE 4: 4Basic Needs and Essential 
Services. RELATES TO SO1 
REFUGEE RESPONSE OBJECTIVE 5: 5Community Empowerment and 
Self Reliance. RELATES TO SO1 
50% 59| 39| 2% 
PEOPLE IN NEED 
PEOPLE TARGETED 
FINANCIAL 
REQUIREMENTS 
- 
50% 59 | 39| 2% 
92K - 
- 41.5K - 
39K 
39K 
IDPs Refugees/ 
Asylum 
seekers 
Refugee 
Returnees 
Host 
Communities 
% female % children, 
adult, 
elderly* 
BY STATUS BY SEX & AGE 
*Children (<18 years old), adult 
$58M (18-59 years), elderly (>59 years)

44 
PART II: Refugee response plan 
available to nationals such as health and education, (iv) 
enhancing self-reliance through livelihoods and Vocational 
Skills Training (VST), (v) support for the development of 
updated refugee protection legislation, policy and procedures 
adhering to international standards, and the capacity-building 
of federal, state and regional institutions to prepare for 
transition of registration and RSD, and (vi) for Somali refugees 
who have made the informed decision to voluntarily return 
to Somalia, UNHCR will continue to manage way stations 
/ reception centres in Somalia that act as the point of entry 
for the returnee population, and where counselling and basic 
services are provided. 
UNHCR will continue to use cash as the assistance modality 
of choice, while assistance will also be delivered through 
in-kind support and, indirectly, through capacity-building 
activities with the Government, local actors and partners. 
Additional assistance is provided through core relief items, 
supplementary feeding, and sanitary materials to girls and 
women of reproductive age to improve school attendance and 
engagement in economic opportunities. 
Photo: Kate Holt/UNICEF

45 
PART I: Summar y of nee ds, targets & re quirements 
PART III: ANNEXES 
Acronyms ........................................................................... 46 
Participating organisations & funding requirements .... 47 
Objectives, indicators & targets ....................................... 49 
Planning figures .................................................................. 58 
Collective outcomes ........................................................... 60 
References ........................................................................... 64 
Guide to Giving ..................................................................... 66 
What if? ................................................................................... 67

46 
PART III - ANNEXES: acronyms 
ACRONYMS 
AAP Accountability to Affected Population 
AMISOM African Union Mission in Somalia 
AU African Union 
AWD Acute Watery Diarrhea 
CCCM Camp Coordination and Camp 
Management 
CBI Cash based interventions 
CWG Cash Working Group 
CO Collective Outcomes 
CE Communication Engagement 
CwC Communication with Communities 
CAPS Community Action Plans 
CBCM Community-based complaint mechanism 
CoP Centrality of Protection Strategy 
DSA Detailed Site Assessment 
DOCC Disaster Operations Coordination Centre 
DSRSG Deputy Special Representative of the 
Secretary General 
DSI Durable Solutions Initiative 
ERP Emergency Response Preparedness 
EOD Explosive Ordnance Disposal 
FGS Federal Government of Somalia 
FSNAU Food Security and Nutrition Analysis Unit 
GAM Global Acute Malnutrition 
GBV Gender-Based Violence 
GER Gross Enrollment Rate 
HCT Humanitarian Country Team 
HLP Housing, Land and Property 
HRP Humanitarian Response Plan 
HNO Humanitarian Needs Overview 
IASC Inter-Agency Steering Committee 
ICCG Inter-Cluster Coordination Group 
IDPs Internally Displaced Persons 
IMWG Information Management Working Group 
IERT Integrated Emergency Response Teams 
INSO International NGO Safety Organisation 
IPC Integrated Phase Classification 
MEB Minimum Expenditure Basket 
MPCA Multi-Purpose Cash Assistance 
NDP National Development Plan 
NFI Non-Food Items 
NGO Non-Governmental Organisation 
NHHP Nutrition, Health, and Hygiene Preventative 
Care 
OCHA United Nations Office for Coordination of 
Humanitarian Affairs 
PIN People in Need 
PDM Post Distribution Monitoring 
PES Post-Eviction Stress 
PLW Pregnant and Lactating Women 
PSEA Protection from Sexual Exploitation and 
Abuse 
RSD Refugee Status Determination 
RPM Response Planning and Monitoring 
RRF Resilience and Recovery Framework 
SAM Severe Acute Malnutrition 
SMS Short Message Service 
SDRF Somalia Development and Reconstruction 
Facility 
SEMA Somalia Explosive Management Authority 
SHF Somalia Humanitarian Fund 
SWALIM Somalia Water and Land Information 
Management 
SDGs Sustainable Development Goals 
UASC Unaccompanied and Separated Children 
UNFPA United Population Fund 
UNHCR United Nations High Commissioner for 
Refugees 
UNDSS United Nations Department for Safety and 
Security 
UNHAS United Nations Humanitarian Air Service 
UNSF United Nations Strategic Framework 
VST Vocational Skills Training 
WASH Water, Sanitation and Hygiene

47 
PART III - ANNEXES: Participating organisations & funding re quirements 
PARTICIPATING ORGANISATIONS & FUNDING REQUIREMENTS 
ORGANISATION REQUIREMENTS (US$) 
World Food Programme 244,603,838 
United Nations Children's Fund 145,325,618 
United Nations High Commissioner for 
Refugees 
136,134,332 
Food & Agriculture Organization of the 
United Nations 
104,761,566 
International Organization for Migration 41,336,450 
Save the Children 38,097,920 
Norwegian Refugee Council 31,253,000 
World Vision International 15,598,076 
Organisation of the Islamic Conference 14,877,996 
Danish Refugee Council 14,190,400 
Agency for Technical Cooperation and 
Development 
13,280,000 
Mercy Corps 11,999,998 
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian 
Affairs 
10,833,619 
Action Contre la Faim 10,549,997 
United Nations Population Fund 9,673,514 
Center for Peace and Democracy 8,621,709 
American Refugee Committee 7,199,947 
Wardi Relief and Development Initiatives 7,069,475 
Diakonie Katastrophenhilfe 7,008,710 
Cooperazione E Sviluppo - CESVI 6,935,192 
Sustainable Development and Peace 
Building Initiatives 
6,500,000 
International Rescue Committee 6,363,525 
CARE Somalia 6,319,533 
INTERSOS Humanitarian Aid Organization 5,929,430 
Relief International 5,766,622 
OXFAM Netherlands (NOVIB) 5,703,762 
Wamo Relief and Rehabilitation Services 5,273,900 
African Development Solutions 4,780,000 
Comitato Internationale per lo Sviluppo 
dei Popoli 
4,594,497 
MEDAIR 4,540,304 
World Health Organization 4,500,000 
Islamic Relief Worldwide 4,218,918 
Humanitarian Initiative Just Relief Aid 
Organization 
4,053,901 
Concern Worldwide 3,980,738 
Somali Young Doctors Association 3,638,898 
AYUUB Organization 3,240,910 
Zamzam Foundation 3,125,000 
ORGANISATION REQUIREMENTS (US$) 
Rural Education and Agriculture Development 
Organization 
3,120,000 
African Volunteers for Relief and Development 2,942,530 
Women and Children Child Care Organization 2,820,876 
CARE International 2,800,000 
Catholic Relief Services 2,773,764 
Deeg-Roor Medical Organization 2,764,325 
Agricultural Development Organisation 2,554,100 
Cooperazione Internazionale - COOPI 2,445,900 
Save Somali Women & Children 2,430,545 
International NGO Safety Organisation 2,407,783 
Aid Vision 2,370,785 
African Network for the Prevention and 
Protection Against Child Abuse and Neglect in 
Somalia 
2,360,500 
Qatar Red Crescent Society 2,341,052 
Hidig Relief And Development Organization 2,327,576 
Towfiiq Umbrella Organization 2,311,280 
Mercy-USA for Aid and Development 2,286,944 
ACT Alliance / Norwegian Church Aid 2,234,420 
United Nations Mine Action Service 2,200,000 
Action Against Disasters Somalia 1,892,500 
International Medical Corps 1,855,000 
New Ways Organization 1,782,976 
Skills Active Forward 1,671,148 
Handicap International / Humanity & Inclusion 1,637,000 
Qatar Charity 1,595,000 
World Vision Somalia 1,589,238 
SomaliAid 1,588,320 
Nomadic Assistance for Peace and 
Development 
1,547,915 
Vétérinaires sans Frontières (Germany) 1,526,398 
Northern Frontier Youth League 1,364,420 
Somali Community Concern 1,298,290 
Puntland Minority Women Development 
Organisation 
1,298,256 
Iimaan Relief and Development Organization 1,292,146 
Gedo Women Development Organization 1,265,000 
Active in Development Aid 1,224,000 
ActionAid International 1,203,369 
Burhakaba Town Section Committee 1,191,600 
Solutions for Humanity International 1,165,700 
Somali Organic Agriculture Development 
Organization 
1,120,000 

48 
PART III - ANNEXES: Participating organisations & funding re quirements 
ORGANISATION REQUIREMENTS (US$) 
Southern Aid 1,110,790 
Community Development and 
Humanitarian Network 
1,104,999 
Somali Vulnerable Actors 1,100,632 
Shabelle Relief and Development 
Organization - SRDO 
1,075,150 
Somali Women Development Centre 1,073,300 
Women Pioneers for Peace and Life 1,050,650 
Adventist Development and Relief Agency 994,999 
Human Development Concern 987,321 
Human Appeal UK 973,300 
DEH Relief and Development Organization 938,730 
Shabelle Humanitarian and Relief 
Organization 
930,000 
Direct Aid 904,960 
Somali Relief and Development Society 896,000 
Wajir South Development Association 894,000 
Polish Humanitarian Action 866,973 
Physicians Across Continents 865,062 
Social Life and Agricultural Development 
Organisation 
839,858 
Riverine Relief Program 830,000 
Juba Foundation 783,190 
Peace Action Society Organisation for 
Somalia 
765,000 
Somali Development and Rehabilitation 
Organisation 
763,814 
Great Hope Foundation 750,000 
Humanitarian Africa Relief Development 
Organization 
715,000 
Dialog Forening 705,390 
Vétérinaires sans Frontières (Switzerland) 690,000 
Socio-Economic Development and Human 
Rights Organization 
680,000 
Rasawad Welfare Association 661,580 
Active Development Aid 653,679 
Action for Women and Children Concern 648,150 
Himilo Relief and Development Association 605,552 
Peace and Development Action 604,342 
Green Hope 600,250 
Gruppo per le Relazioni Transculturali 583,346 
Somali Youth Voluntary Group Association 570,375 
Himilo Organization for Development 566,334 
International Federation of Red Cross and 
Red Crescent Societies 
545,592 
Somali Society Development Association 526,206 
ORGANISATION REQUIREMENTS (US$) 
Ocean Training and Promotion 524,300 
Somaliland Nutrition and Rural Development 
Organization 
509,570 
International Media Support 500,000 
Comprehensive Community Based 
Rehabilitation in Somaliland 
499,508 
Rainwater Association of Somalia 494,688 
Humanitarian Integrity for Women Action on 
Advocacy for Peace and Human Right 
488,821 
Aamin Organization 470,813 
KAALO Relief and Development Organisation 465,000 
Mandher Relief and Development 
Organization 
450,000 
Regional Development Association 431,880 
Empowering Vulnerable Society Organization 429,042 
KAAH Relief and Development Organization 403,290 
Action for Relief and Development 400,000 
Trocaire 394,600 
KAALO Aid and Development 385,000 
Barwaaqo Voluntary Organization 383,137 
Formal Education Network for Private Schools 350,000 
African Development Trust 340,000 
Women Association for Relief and 
Development Actions 
323,000 
Elbon Development and Relief Organization 300,000 
Society Development Initiative Organization 300,000 
Bay Regional Education Committee 299,998 
Urban and Rural Development Organization 296,700 
Women Initiative for Society Empowerment 292,900 
Community Activity for Development and 
Relief Organization 
292,850 
African Relief Development initiative 281,189 
Livelihood Relief and Development 
Organization 
250,000 
African Relief and Development 239,500 
Somali Children Development Association 169,384 
Family Empowerment and Relief Organisation 151,458 

49 
PART III - ANNEXES: Objecti ves , in dicators & targets 
OBJECTIVES, INDICATORS & TARGETS 
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES 
Strategic Objective 1 (SO1): Reduce acute humanitarian needs and excess mortality among the most 
vulnerable by providing life-saving and sustaining integrated assistance. 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET 
Reduce the percentage of people in severe acute food insecurity 
phases (crisis and worse) from the total population in Somali from 
post Gu 2018 level 
1.42 million 12% (1.42 million) 10%(1.2 million) 
Number of people in targeted settlements and communities with 
access to temporary safe water services 
2,306,600 1,309,200 2.092,200 
Strategic Objective 2 (SO2): Reduce emergency levels of acute malnutrition by strengthening nutritionsensitive 
and integrated, multi-sectoral programming. 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET 
Medium Prevalence rate (%) of global acute malnutrition in children 
6 to 59 months of age) 
946,000 14% 12.5% 
Percentage of IDPs in acute food insecurity phases (stressed and 
worse) from the total acute food insecure population (sum of IPC 2, 3, 
4 and 5) post Gu 2018 level 
1.9 million 41% 35% 
Number of people in targeted settlements and communities with 
access to sustainable safe water service 
1,581,320 247,290 889,360 
Coverage of vaccinations for children 6-59 months –Penta 3 and 
micronutrients 
962,000 42% 85% 
Strategic Objective 3 (SO3): Ensure protection of affected populations, including those living in hard-toreach 
areas and IDP settlements, through protection promoting assistance that targets the most vulnerable and 
people at risk of exclusion.. 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET 
Number of safety audit conducted in IDP settlements with follow up 
actions taken to improve safety conditions 
955 38 100 
Percentage of SHF funded projects with protection – oriented 
objectives and indicators 
N/A 100% 
Number of people in targeted settlements and communities having 
access to a gender separated sanitation facility and located at less 
than 50 m from the household and equipped with a lockable door 
1,906,290 433,428 953,150 
Strategic Objective 4 (SO4): Increase resilience capacity of at risk communities and promote 
complementary interventions of development partners in social services. 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET 
Number of individuals (or percentage of people targeted) supported 
with livelihoods inputs and protection assistance including livelihood 
diversification options 
3,400,000 2,900,000 2,900,000 (85%) 
Number of government institutions receiving support from the 
cluster 
10 10 10 
Number of protracted IDPs/refugee returnees provided with safe, 
well-tailored, sustainable and habitable shelter with appropriate land 
tenure security 
175,800 114,000

50 
PART III - ANNEXES: Objecti ves , in dicators & targets 
CAMP COORDINATION AND CAMP MANAGEMENT 
CCCM Objective 1: Strengthen the predictability and effectiveness of multi sectorial services at site level 
through improved site management and coordination. Relates to SO1, SO2, SO3 & SO4. 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET 
Number of sites with established CCCM mechanisms 1,911 705 1,911 
Number of districts covered by the Detailed Site Assessment 90 53 60 
Number of government institutions receiving support from the 
cluster 
10 10 10 
CCCM Objective 2: Improve living conditions of displaced people through site development, care and 
maintenance. Relates to SO1 & SO2. 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET 
Number of sites that have received care and maintenance support 1,911 705 1,911 
CCCM Objective 3: Strengthen community self-management and access to information for displaced 
populations. Relates to SO1 & SO2. 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET 
Number of sites with established community participation structures 1,911 705 1,911 
Number of displaced people with access to information about 
humanitarian services 
2,648,000 665,800 1,774,700 
CCCM Objective 4: Support opportunities for displaced people to achieve durable solutions. Relates to SO2 & 
SO4. 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET 
Number of advocacy interventions made to promote durable 
solutions of IDPs 
12 9 12 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET 
Percentages % of adult persons of concern (18 -59 Yrs) whose 
livelihood and self-reliance needs are met through different actions 
19,874 N/A 10,000 
Number of joint HCT-UNCT or Cluster/Pillar Working Group meetings 
to promote complementary humanitarian and development 
interventions 
6 3 6 
EDUCATION 
Education Objective 1: Ensure emergency- and crisis-affected children/youth have access to safe and 
protective learning environment. Relates to SO1, SO3 & SO4. 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET 
Number of children and youth (M/F) reached with Education in 
Emergency assistance 
1,800,200 168,400 330,068 

51 
PART III - ANNEXES: Objecti ves , in dicators & targets 
ENABLING PROGRAMMES 
Enabling Programmes Objective 1: Ensure effective, principled and well-coordinated humanitarian aid to 
ensure equal access for women, girls, boys and men. Relates to SO1, SO2, SO3 and SO4. 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET 
Number of inter-cluster meetings hold in 2019 12 24 12 
Number Humanitarian Country Team (HCT) meetings hold in 2019 12 24 12 
Enabling Programmes Objective 2: Provide timely and relevant information to the population and 
humanitarian partners, to ensure a common understanding of humanitarian needs and to enable more 
informed decision making. Relates to SO1, SO2, SO3 and SO4. 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET 
Number of dashboards produced in 2019 12 12 12 
Number of snapshots produced in 2019 12 12 12 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET 
Number of classrooms constructed or rehabilitated with child friendly 
and inclusive WASH facilities available to emergency-affected 
children and youth 
3,300 159 3,300 
Number of school-aged children and teachers (M/F) with interrupted 
schooling due to attacks on education 
12,000 40 100 
Number of children and youth (M/F) participated in the children 
protection awareness sessions 
1,800,000 0 150,000 
Education Objective 2: Ensure vulnerable children and youth are engaged in life-saving learning that promotes 
personal well-being and social cohesion. Relates to SO1, SO2 & SO4. 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET 
Number of school-aged children (M/F) benefiting from emergency 
teaching and learning materials 
1,800,000 147,000 330,068 
Number of teachers (M/F) supported with emergency incentives 12,0000 3,400 5,000 
Number of school children (M/F) with access to safe drinking water 1,800,000 119,000 240,000 
Number of school children (M/F) with access to emergency school 
feeding 
1,800,000 80,000 210,000 
Education Objective 3: Strengthened capacity to deliver effective and coordinated education in emergencies 
preparedness and response within the education system. Relates to SO1 & SO4. 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET 
Number of teachers (M/F) trained in basic pedagogy, life-saving 
learning skills (e.g. Disaster Risk Reduction, health and hygiene, 
gender based violence) and psychosocial support 
12,000 2,000 5,000 
Number of CEC members (M/F) trained in Safe Schools, contingency 
planning, DRR, maintenance and management of learning spaces 
4,000 1,900 11,000 
Provision of training for cluster partners and MoE staff on 
emergencies preparedness and response 
150 100 150

52 
PART III - ANNEXES: Objecti ves , in dicators & targets 
Enabling Programmes Objective 3: Fill in the identified logistics gaps by ensuring the continuity of the UN 
Humanitarian Air Service flights. 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET 
Number of passengers transported on regular scheduled and ad-hoc 
UNHAS flights (per month) 
2,000 2,000 
Percentage of security and medical evacuation requests completed 100% 100% 
Enabling Programmes Objective 4: Enhance safety and security of humanitarian personnel and assets, to 
enable operations and ensure continuity of humanitarian programme delivery. Relates to SO1, SO2, SO3 and 
SO4. 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET 
Percentages of areas of operation reached with safe access. N/A 80 
Number of incident reports produced, regular reports, advisories. N/A 24 
FOOD SECURITY 
Food Security Objective 1: Improve households’ immediate access to food through provision of conditional 
and unconditional assistance depending on the severity of food insecurity phases, vulnerability and 
seasonality of the livelihoods. Relates to SO1, SO2, SO3 & SO4. 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET 
Reduce the percentage of people in sever acute food insecurity 
phases (crisis and worse) from the total population in Somali from 
post Gu 2018 level (baseline 12%) to 10%. The long-term average 
17% 
1,561,813 12% (post Gu 2018) and 17% 
(Long term-average) 
10% 
Food Security Objective 2: Protect and restore livelihoods, related food and income sources, through provision 
of seasonally appropriate livelihood inputs and technical support in rural and peri-urban settings. Relates to 
SO1, SO2, SO3 & SO4. 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET 
Percentage of beneficiaries (hhs) supported with livelihoods inputs 
(agriculture, livestock and fishers) compared to target beneficiaries 
(HH) per season 
1.078,299 90% 90% 
Food Security Objective 3: Support household and community resilience to shocks, through rehabilitation and/ 
or restoration of productive assets, enhance livelihood strategies and disaster preparedness. Relates to SO1, 
SO2, SO3 & SO4 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET 
Reduce the percentage of people in acute food insecurity phases 
from the total population in Somalia from post Gu 2018 level 
(baseline 37%) to 35% 
4,639,209 37% 35%

53 
PART III - ANNEXES: Objecti ves , in dicators & targets 
HEALTH 
Health Objective 1: Improve equitable access to quality emergency and essential lifesaving health services for 
crisis affected aimed at reducing avoidable morbidity and mortality. Relates to SO1, SO2, SO3 & SO4. 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET 
Number of outpatient consultations per person per year (Target > = 
1 new visit / person / year) 
3,022,400 2,778,500 2,381,000 
Proportion of children under 1 year received Penta3 vaccine 119,000 817,000 119,000 
Proportion of births assisted by a skilled birth attendant 74,400 80,000- 26,000 
Health Objective 2: Mitigate impact and respond to shocks to the affected population as a result of conflict 
and public health emergencies. Relates to SO1, SO3 & SO4 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET 
Proportions of communicable diseases outbreaks investigated and 
responded to in the first 96 hrs. (target should be above 80%) 
3,022,400 2,115,680 2,417,920 
Number of equipped trauma management centres / 250,000 
population (target > = 1) 
3,022,400 0 3,022,400 
NUTRITION 
Nutrition Objective 1: Improve equitable access to quality lifesaving curative nutrition services through 
systematic identification, referral and treatment of acutely malnourished cases. Relates to SO1, SO2, SO3 & 
SO4. 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET 
Number of boys and girls 6-59 months with severe acute 
malnutrition treated 
177,530 177,530 
Number of boys and girls 6-59 months with moderate acute 
malnutrition treated 
780,410 470,260 
Number of PLW with moderate acute malnutrition treated 275,660 127,500 
Nutrition Objective 2: Strengthen lifesaving food based therapeutic/preventive nutrition services for 
vulnerable population groups focusing on blanket supplementary feeding. Relates to SO1 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET 
Number of boys and girls under age of two and PLW provided with 
BSFP 
225,260 225,260

54 
PART III - ANNEXES: Objecti ves , in dicators & targets 
Protection Objective 2: Strengthen resilience of individuals, communities and institutions exposed to 
protection risks, and prevent further abuse. Relates to SO2 & SO4. 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET 
Number of girls and boys participating in community-based 
psychosocial support activities. 
463,000 TBD 250,000 
Number of gender based violence survivors and child victims of 
violations (including children associated with armed groups/forces) 
reached with social-economic reintegration 
11,000 TBD GBV: 2,900 
CP: 3.,000 
Number of other individuals with specific needs or heightened 
vulnerability reached with protection oriented direct assistance 
13,000 TBD 7,000 
Number of households protected from forced eviction threats 
through preventive engagements 
77,700 TBD 42,000 
Number of individuals targeted with rights based public outreach 
and awareness raising 
1,542,000 TBD GBV: 225,000 
CP: 400,000 
EH: 208,000 
Number of duty bearers, service providers and community leaders 
trained on protection 
N/A TBD CP: 4,700 
GBV: 2,000 
EH: 500 
HLP: 500 
GP: 1,000 
Protection Objective 3: Strengthen coordination of protection services and enhance advocacy on protection 
with relevant stakeholders. Relates to SO1, SO2 & SO4. 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET 
Number of GBV or CP referral pathways in place with SOPs and 
service mappings 
N/A 16 GBV: 6 
CP: 4 
Number of protection monitoring and displacement reports, 
assessments disseminated with gender disaggregated data 
N/A TBD 35 
PROTECTION 
Protection Objective 1: Address acute protection needs of women, men, girls and boys, stemming from 
violence, including GBV, as well as coercion, and abuse. Relates to SO1 & SO2. 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET 
Number of of unaccompanied and separated girls and boys 
identified, documented, and receiving family tracing services 
15,000 TBD 15,000 
Number of gender based violence survivors receiving clinical care, 
case management, psychosocial support, legal assistance, and safe 
house support 
148,000 TBD GBV: 70,000 
CP: 10,000 
Number of individuals supported with cash to cope with post-eviction 
stress. 
46,600 TBD 25,200 
Number of explosive hazards removed TBD TBD 3,000

55 
PART III - ANNEXES: Objecti ves , in dicators & targets 
WATER, SANITATION AND HYGIENE (WASH) 
WASH Objective 1: Deliver life-saving WASH assistance to reduce acute needs among the most vulnerable 
settlements and communities. Relates to SO1 & SO2. 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET 
Number of people in targeted settlements and communities with 
access to temporary safe water services 
2,306,560 1,309,160 2,092,170 
Number of people in targeted settlements and communities with 
access to an emergency sanitation facility and/or services 
1,680,700 291,910 1,092,460 
Number of people in targeted settlements and communities 
practicing hand washing with soap at critical moments 
2,702,390 1,468,430 2,213,140 
SHELTER AND NFI 
Shelter Objective 1: Contribute to the protection of newly displaced people, IDPs / refugee returns / host 
community and those affected by natural hazards. Relates to SO2 & SO3. 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET 
Number of people in need of emergency assistance receiving 
appropriate NFIs though in kind distribution, vouchers or cash 
mechanisms 
555,145 450,000 360,000 
Number of people in need of emergency assistance receiving 
relevant emergency shelters through in kind distribution, vouchers or 
cash mechanisms. 
323,830 420,000 210,000 
Number of people in need of emergency assistance receiving 
emergency assistance package through pipeline mechanisms within 
3 weeks from the onset of disaster. 
647,670 450,000 420,000 
Shelter Objective 2: Improve the living conditions and contribute to local reintegration of the protracted 
internally displaced persons (IDPs) and refugees returning back to their place of origin. Relates to SO3 & SO4 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET 
Number of protracted IDPs/refugee returnees provided with safe, 
well-tailored, sustainable and habitable shelter with appropriate land 
tenure security 
175,800 120,000 114,000 
Number of protracted IDPs/refugee returnees receiving non-food 
items through in kind distribution, vouchers or cash mechanisms. 
508,890 30,000 330,000 
Number of protracted IDPs supported in repairing and maintaining 
their shelters. 
101,780 72,000 66,000 
Shelter Objective 3: Improve the quality of shelter assistance and ensure accountability through effective 
mechanisms. Relates to SO1, SO3 & SO4. 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET 
Percentage of shelter assistance projects delivered through cash 
modalities. 
100% 15% 50% 
Percentage of shelter assistance projects incorporating CRFM and 
CwC. 
100% 30% 100% 
Percentage of shelter assistance projects incorporating settlement 
planning. 
100% 10% 100%

56 
PART III - ANNEXES: Objecti ves , in dicators & targets 
MULTI-SECTORAL ASSISTANCE 
Multi-sectorial Assistance Objective 1: Strengthen integrated multi-sectoral response, to ensure delivery of 
humanitarian response to the most vulnerable people is targeted and inclusive. Relates to SO1. 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET 
Percentage or number of vulnerable people in priority districts, other 
than IDPs/host communities, reached with integrated multi-sectoral 
response 
92,200 78,000 41,500 
Percentage or number of vulnerable IDPs/host community members, 
in priority districts, reached with integrated multi-sectoral response 
92,200 78,000 41,500 
Multi-sectorial Assistance Objective 2: Provide multi-purpose cash assistance (MPCA) for highly vulnerable 
people (displaced during the year or newly displaced) in priority locations with functioning markets. Relates to 
SO1 & SO4. 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET 
Number (or %) of beneficiary households reporting an improvement 
in their ability to meet basic needs. 
92,200 41,500 
Number of MPCA beneficiaries reporting a reduction in the use of 
negative Coping Strategies by the end of their assistance. 
92,200 41,500 
WASH Objective 2: Reduce risk of violence against women, children and vulnerable groups when accessing 
WASH services. Relates to SO3. 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET 
Number of people in targeted settlements and communities having 
access to a gender separated sanitation facility and located at less 
than 50 m from the household and equipped with a lockable door. 
1,906,290 433,428 953,150 
Number of people in targeted settlements and communities having 
their main source of drinking water located at less than 500 meters 
from the household and a queuing time less than 30 minutes. 
1,680,700 725,340 1,176,491 
WASH Objective 3: Provide or restore sustainable access to safe water and adequate sanitation services in 
targeted communities and institutions. Relates to SO1, SO2 SO3 & SO4. 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET 
Number of people in targeted settlements and communities with 
access to sustainable safe water service 
1,581,320 247,290 889,360 
Number of people in targeted settlements and communities with 
access to sustainable an adequate sanitation facility 
1,188,890 284,480 609,000 
Number of institutions (schools or health structures) provided with a 
minimum water and sanitation package 
N/A 150

57 
PART III - ANNEXES: Objecti ves , in dicators & targets 
REFUGEE RESPONSE 
Refugee Response Objective 1: Favourable Protection Environment and Durable Solutions. Relates to SO3 & 
SO4. 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET 
Number of Refugees and Asylum Seekers in need of asylum space 38,970 31,991 38,970 
Number of Refugees identified for urgent need of durable solutions 
related to resettlement 
200 60 
Refugee Response Objective 2: Fair Protection Processes and Documentation. Relates to SO3. 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET 
Number of persons of concern registered on an individual basis 38,970 1,980 38,970 
Extent applicants have access to status determination procedure 38,970 N/A 38,970 
Refugee Response Objective 3: Security from Violence and Exploitation. Relates to SO3. 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET 
Number of reported SGBV cases receiving both materials and legal 
assistance 
1,000 305 500 
Refugee Response Objective 4: Basic Needs and Essential Services. Relates to SO1. 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET 
Percentage/Extent persons of concern have access to primary health 
care (including improving facilities and equipment) 
100 N/A 100 
Percentages of persons of concern with specific needs (PSN) who 
receive services for their specific needs 
100 N/A 90 
Percentages of primary school-aged children enrolled in primary 
education 
100 N/A 75 
Number of primary school-aged chidren enrolled in primary 
education 
13,217 N/A 13,217 
Percentages of targeted households whose basic needs are met with 
multi-purpose cash grants or vouchers 
100 N/A 60 
Number of HH whose basic needs are met with multi-purpose cash 
grant or vouchers 
7,794 N/A 4,676 
Percentages of women with sanitary supplies 100 N/A 40 
Number of women receiving sanitary materials 17,810 N/A 6,900 
Refugee Response Objective 5: Community Empowerment and Self Reliance. Relates to SO4 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET 
Percentages % of adult persons of concern (18 -59 Yrs) whose 
livelihood and self-reliance needs are met through different actions 
19,874 N/A 10,000

58 
PART III - ANNEXES: Planning figures: people in need and tar geted 
PLANNING FIGURES: PEOPLE IN NEED AND TARGETED 
AWDAL 
WOQOOYI 
GALBEED 
TOGDHEER 
SANAAG 
SOOL 
BARI 
NUGAAL 
MUDUG 
GALGADUUD 
HIRAAN 
MIDDLE SHABELLE 
BANADIR 
BAKOOL 
BAY 
LOWER SHABELLE 
GEDO 
MIDDLE JUBA 
IDPs Refugees/ 
Asylum 
seekers 
Refugee 
Returnees 
% female % 
children, 
adult, 
elderly* 
People 
in 
need 
Total 
population 
BY STATUS BY SEX & AGE* TOTAL 
Host 
communities 
TOTAL 2.6M 
306K 
252K 
126K 
111K 
233K 
256K 
64K 
155K 
177K 
279K 
99K 
721K 
101K 
370K 
370K 
268K 
112K 
235K 
673K 
1.2M 
721K 
544K 
327K 
730K 
393K 
718K 
569K 
521K 
516K 
1.7M 
367K 
792K 
1.2M 
508K 
363K 
489K 
4.2M 12.3M 
59 | 39| 2% 
59 | 39| 2% 
59 | 39| 2% 
59 | 39| 2% 
59 | 39| 2% 
59 | 39| 2% 
59 | 39| 2% 
59 | 39| 2% 
59 | 39| 2% 
59 | 39| 2% 
59 | 39| 2% 
59 | 39| 2% 
59 | 39| 2% 
59 | 39| 2% 
59 | 39| 2% 
59 | 39| 2% 
59 | 39| 2% 
59 | 39| 2% 
50% 
50% 
50% 
50% 
50% 
50% 
50% 
50% 
50% 
50% 
50% 
50% 
50% 
50% 
50% 
50% 
50% 
50% 
280K 
112K 

19K 

47K 
4K 

33K 
201K 
44K 
203K 
53K 
94K 
231K 
59K 
69K 
9K 
1.5M 50% 59 | 39| 2% 
0.1K 
0.6K 
0.1K 


1.4K 
0.1K 
0.1K 
0.1K 
0.4K 
2K 
17K 

4.2K 
0.7K 
2.3K 
2K 
61K 
92K 
0.3K 
22K 
0.5K 
0.2K 

10K 

0.1K 


1.7K 
4K 




0.7K 

39K 
26K 
117K 
126K 
92K 
233K 
198K 
60K 
155K 
144K 
78K 
51K 
497K 
48K 
272K 
139K 
207K 
40K 
165K 
PEOPLE IN NEED 
OCTOBER 2018 
*Children (<18 years old), adult (18-59 years), elderly (>59 

59 
PART III - ANNEXES: Planning figures: people in need and tar geted 
AWDAL 
WOQOOYI 
GALBEED 
TOGDHEER 
SANAAG 
SOOL 
BARI 
NUGAAL 
MUDUG 
GALGADUUD 
HIRAAN 
MIDDLE SHABELLE 
BANADIR 
BAKOOL 
BAY 
LOWER SHABELLE 
GEDO 
MIDDLE JUBA 
IDPs Refugees/ 
Asylum 
seekers 
Refugee 
Returnees 
% female People 
targeted 
people in 
need 
BY STATUS BY SEX & AGE* TOTAL 
Host 
communities 
% children, 
adult, 
elderly* 
TOTAL 2M
22K 
105K 
78K 
50K 
148K 
153K 
43K 
115K 
97K 
95K 
42K 
486K 
48K 
272K 
139K 
207K 
40K 
165K 
234K 
207K 
84K 
100K 
164K 
229K 
67K 
120K 
134K 
242K 
87K 
577K 
93K 
292K 
297K 
238K 
89K 
190K 
306K 
252K 
126K 
111K 
233K 
256K 
64K 
155K 
177K 
279K 
99K 
721K 
101K 
370K 
370K 
268K 
112K 
235K 
3.4M 4.2M 
59 | 39| 2% 
59 | 39| 2% 
59 | 39| 2% 
59 | 39| 2% 
59 | 39| 2% 
59 | 39| 2% 
59 | 39| 2% 
59 | 39| 2% 
59 | 39| 2% 
59 | 39| 2% 
59 | 39| 2% 
59 | 39| 2% 
59 | 39| 2% 
59 | 39| 2% 
59 | 39| 2% 
59 | 39| 2% 
59 | 39| 2% 
59 | 39| 2% 
50% 
50% 
50% 
50% 
50% 
50% 
50% 
50% 
50% 
50% 
50% 
50% 
50% 
50% 
50% 
50% 
50% 
50% 
212K 
80K 
5K 
50K 
16K 
65K 
24K 
4K 
31K 
146K 
41K 
70K 
67K 
31K 
226K 
97K 
55K 
42K 
1.3M 50% 59 | 39| 2% 
0.03K 
0.3K 
0.05K 
0.01K 
0.02K 
0.64K 
0.03K 
0.04K 
0.05K 
0.2K 
0.9K 
8K 
0.01K 
2K 
0.3K 
1K 
0.9K 
28K 
41.5K 
0.25K 
22K 
0.49K 
0.16K 
0.01K 
10K 
0.02K 
0.09K 


1K 
4K 




0.65K 

39K 
PEOPLE TARGETED 
NOVEMBER 2018 
*Children (<18 years old), adult (18-59 years), elderly (>59 

60 
PART III - ANNEXES: co llecti ve outcomes for somalia 
COLLECTIVE OUTCOMES FOR SOMALIA 
At the end of 2017, humanitarian and development partners proposed four Collective Outcomes (COs) to reduce needs, risks 
and vulnerabilities and increase resilience by 2022. The COs are based on the key findings from the 2018 Humanitarian Needs 
Overview (HNO) and Drought Impact Needs Assessment (DINA). The COs represent the key areas that require combined 
humanitarian and development action. The operationalisation of the Collective Outcomes will seek to ensure that the activities 
led under the various plans, strategies and frameworks are complementary and effectively sequenced in a way that effectively 
reduces needs, risks and vulnerabilities. While the COs have been endorsed by the HCT, some targets/indicators may be slightly 
modified to adjust to the changing context in Somalia. 
Collective outcome 1: By 2022, the number of people in acute food 
insecurity decreases by 84 percent, with GAM rates reduced by 5% 
and sustained below the emergency threshold. 
Lead: WFP/FAO 
• Relates to SDG 1-End poverty in all its forms everywhere; 2 - End hunger, achieve food security and improved nutrition 
and promote sustainable agriculture; 8 - Promote sustained, inclusive and sustainable economic growth, full and productive 
employment and decent work for all. 
• Relates to NDP Resilience Pillar / Food Security and Nutrition Target - Decrease in numbers of rural acutely food insecure in 
IPC Phase 3 or above. 
• Related UNSF Outcome 4.2: Resilience and cohesion of Somali society strengthened through food and nutrition security and 
social protection systems. 
• Related to HRP Strategic Objectives 1 and 2: Life-saving and Nutrition. 
INDICATOR49 BASELINE 
DEC 2017 
TARGET 
DEC 2018 
TARGET 
DEC 2019 
TARGET 
DEC 2020 
TARGET 
DEC 2021 
TARGET 
DEC 2022 
SOURCE50 REPORTING 
FOCAL POINT 
1.1 Number of people in 
IPC 3, 4 and 5 
3.2 million 2,500,000 1,500,000 1,000,000 750,000 500,000 HRP FSNAU 
1.2 Medium Global Acute 
Malnutrition (GAM) 
prevalence 
17.4% 16.4% 15.4% 14.4% 13.4% 12.4% Nutrition 
Cluster, 
FSNAU, HNO/ 
HRP 
UNICEF 
1.3 Households with 
Acceptable Food 
Consumption score 
45.6% 55% 60% 65% 65% 65% UNSF 4.2.2, 
NDP 
WFP 
1.4 Production levels in 
crop, livestock, and 
fishery sectors 
(Increment in 
production and 
productivity) 
Agriculture: 
Sorghum-1MT 
Maize -1.5 MT 
Livestock: 
Goats milk 
yield-0.4 l/day; 
Fodder - <1% 
Fisheries: 
Marine catch 
- 30,000 T 
TBD TBD Agriculture: 
25% 
Livestock: 
20% 
Fisheries: 
15% 
TBD TBD UNSF 5.2.3 FAO 
1.5 Coping Strategy Index 12 11 11 10 10 9 UNSF WFP/ FAO

61 
PART III - ANNEXES: co llecti ve outcomes for somalia 
Collective outcome 2: Risk and vulnerability reduced and resilience of 
internally displaced persons, refugee returnees and host communities 
strengthened in order to reach durable solutions for 100,000 
displaced households by 2022. 
Lead: Durable Solutions Unit in Integrated Office/UNHCR 
• Relates to SDG 1- End poverty in all its forms everywhere; 4 - Ensure inclusive and equitable quality education for all; 5 - 
Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls; 8 - Promote […] full and productive employment and decent work 
for all; 10 - Reduce inequality within countries; 11 - Make cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable; 
16 - peace, justice and strong institutions. 
• Relates to NDP Resilience Pillar / Reintegration of the Displaced Vision - To reverse the trend of protracted displacement 
and substantially reduce the number of IDPs; Chapters III on poverty; V on economic development; VII on social and human 
development; VIII on infrastructure; and IX on building resilience capacity. 
• Relates UNSF Outcome 4.3: Provision of comprehensive and sustainable solutions for IDPs, vulnerable migrants, refugee 
returnees and host communities. 
• Relates to HRP Strategic Objectives 3 and 4: Protection and Resilience. 
INDICATOR BASELINE 
DEC 2017 
TARGET 
DEC 2018 
TARGET 
DEC 2019 
TARGET 
DEC 2020 
TARGET 
DEC 2021 
TARGET 
DEC 2022 
SOURCE REPORTING 
FOCAL POINT 
2.1 Number of IDPs/ 
returnees having 
reached durable 
solutions (DS) (return/ 
reintegration) 
n/a 10,000 
households 
(55,000 
people51) 
20,000 
households 
(110,000 
people) 
40,000 
households 
(220,000 
people) 
70,000 
households 
(385,000 
people) 
100,000 
(550,000 
people) 
NDP-SDRF 
Annual Work 
Plan 
RCO Durable 
Solutions Unit 
2.2 Number of 
settlements/areas 
of return impacted 
by displacement 
included in urban 
extension plans/ rural 
dev. plans and % of 
plans fully/partially 
implemented 
n/a Targets to be 
defined in 
2018 
TBD TBD TBD TBD NDP-SDRF 
Annual Work 
Plan 
UNHCR 
2.3 Number of IDPs/ 
returnees with 
access to livelihoods/ 
employment 
generating an average 
daily income of 
$1.4752 per person 
per day 
n/a Targets to be 
defined in 
2018 
TBD TBD TBD TBD NDP-SDRF 
Annual Work 
Plan 
RCO Durable 
Solutions Unit 
2.4 Number of IDPs/ 
returnees with ID 
papers, property/ 
tenancy entitlements 
No 
mechanism in 
place for land 
and property 
registry 
TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD NDP-SDRF 
Annual Work 
Plan 
RCO Durable 
Solutions Unit 
2.5 Number of 
government entities 
& regional/local 
authorities capacitated 
to coordinate and lead 
DS initiatives 
n/a Targets to be 
defined in 
2018 
TBD TBD TBD TBD NDP-SDRF 
Annual Work 
Plan 
UN Habitat, 
IOM

62 
PART III - ANNEXES: co llecti ve outcomes for somalia 
Collective outcome 3: Number of vulnerable people53 with equitable 
access to inclusive basic social services54 increases by 27 per cent by 
2022 
Lead: UNICEF 
• Relates to SDG 3 - Ensure healthy lives and promote well-being for all at all ages; 4 – Ensure inclusive and equitable quality 
education and promote lifelong learning opportunities for all; 5 – Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls; and 
6 - Ensure availability and sustainable management of water and sanitation for all. 
• Relates to NDP Social & Human Development Pillar Goal - Provide adequate and safe water, hygiene and sanitation for all 
people in Somalia; NDP Social & Human Development Pillar Goal on Health - Reduce maternal and child mortalities and 
improve quality of life through improved access to essential health services of acceptable quality and through prevention and 
control of communicable and non-communicable diseases. 
• Related UNSF Outcome 5.1: The Smali population benefits has improved access to ad benefits from equitable and quality 
essential social services. 2.3: Strengthened local governance through provision of basic and public services will contribute to peace 
and stability . 
• Related to HRP Strategic Objectives 1, 2, 3 and 4: Life-saving, Nutrition, Protection and Resilience level. 
INDICATOR BASELINE 
DEC 2017 
TARGET 
DEC 2018 
TARGET 
DEC 2019 
TARGET 
DEC 2020 
TARGET 
DEC 2021 
TARGET 
DEC 2022 
SOURCE REPORTING 
FOCAL POINT 
3.1 Number of people 
with access to 
sustainable safe water 
& sanitation 
6.36 million 
(53%) 
7.32 million 
(61%) 
7.8 million 
(65%) 
8.28 million 
(69%) 
9 million 
(75%) 
9.6 million 
(80%) 
UNSF 5.1.1, 
NDP 
UNICEF 
3.2 Under-five mortality 
rate 
133/1,000 
(2016) 
131/1,000 129/1,000 127/1,000 125/1,000 <122/1,000 UNSF 5.1.3, 
NDP, UN Interagency 
Group 
for Child 
Mortality 
Estimation 
(UN IGME) 
WHO, UNICEF 
3.3 Primary education 
gross enrolment ratio 
32% 34% 36% 38% 40% 42% UNSF 5.1.2, 
NDP, UNFPA, 
EMIS/MOEs 
UNICEF 
3.4 Number of people 
with obstructed access 
to services55 (decrease) 
To be defined 
as committed 
in Centrality 
of Protection 
Strategy 
TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD HCT Centrality 
of Protection 
Strategy / 
Implement. 
Framework 
UNHCR / 
Centrality of 
Protection 
Implement. 
Support Group 

63 
PART III - ANNEXES: co llecti ve outcomes for somalia 
Collective outcome 4: Proportion of population affected by climateinduced 
hazards (drought and flood) reduces by 25% by 2022 
Lead: UNDP 
• Relates to SDG 9 – Build resilient infrastructure, promote inclusive and sustainable industrialization and foster innovation; 11 
– Make cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable; 13 – Take urgent action to combat climate change 
and its impacts; 15 – Protect, restore and promote sustainable use of terrestrial ecosystems, sustainably manage forests, combat 
desertification, and halt and reverse land degradation and halt biodiversity loss. 
• Relates to NDP Resilience Pillar Goals on Disaster Management. 
• Related UNSF Outcome 4.1: Government capacities, institutions, policies, plans and programmes are strengthened to better 
prevent, prepare for, respond to and recover from the impact of natural and man-made shocks at Federal, FMS levels and local 
level. 
INDICATOR BASELINE 
DEC 2017 
TARGET 
DEC 2018 
TARGET 
DEC 2019 
TARGET 
DEC 2020 
TARGET 
DEC 2021 
TARGET 
DEC 2022 
SOURCE REPORTING 
FOCAL POINT 
4.1 Proportion of people 
affected by climateinduced 
hazards 
65% 62% 59% 56% 53% 49% NDP-SDRF 
Annual Work 
Plan 
UNDP 
4.2 Existence of 
functioning Disaster 
Risk Management 
(DRM) and early 
warning systems 
(EWS) at Federal 
Government (FG) 
and Federal Member 
States (FMS) level 
(gender and age 
sensitive) 
Institutions 
under 
formulation 
Mandates of 
institutions 
dealing with 
DM adopted 
(at FG and 
FMS level) 
Gendersensitive 
vulnerability 
assessments 
are conducted 
throughout 
the country 
FG and FMS 
humanitarian 
& DM 
ministries 
have basic 
capacities to 
perform and 
coordinate 
their 
functions. 
State level 
drought 
& flood 
mitigation 
strategies/ 
plans 
development 
& implemen 
tation started. 
National 
systems for 
DRR respond 
to at least 
50% of 
vulnerable 
people (IDPs, 
women, 
children and 
the elderly) 
DRM and 
EWS are 
operational at 
FG and FMS 
level 
UNSF 4.1.1 UNDP 
4.3 Number of 
gender-sensitive 
laws, policies and 
strategies formulated 
and adopted for 
strengthening DRR 
and climate change 
adaptation 
Weak 
policies and 
regulatory 
frameworks 
1 X 2 (cumulative 
for 2018 to 
2020) 
X 3 (cumulative 
from 2018 to 
2022) 
NDP-SDRF 
Annual Work 
Plan 
UNDP 
4.4 Number of 
communities 
benefiting from DRR 
activities (drought & 
flood risk) 
Lack of 
investments 
in DRR 
2,500 5,000 10,000 15,000 25,000 NDP-SDRF 
Annual Work 
Plan 
UNDP 
4.5 Number of 
households with 
very low resilience 
(using RIMA resilience 
measurement and 
analysis tool) 
600,000 500,000 400,000 300,000 200,000 100,000 NDP-SDRF 
Annual Work 
Plan 
FAO

64 
PART III - ANNEXES: references 
1 These estimates were made based on the results of the 2018 
post-Gu assessments in June/July 2018. Needs are expected to 
increase as result of the poor performance of the 2018 Deyr 
rains (October-December). For more information on the 
PiN calculation, see the 2018 Humanitarian Needs Overview 
(HNO). 
2 EU, FGS, UN, World Bank, “Somalia Drought Impact and 
Needs Assessment – Volume I”, April 2018. 
3 In February 2018, the Somalia Information Management 
Working Group (IMWG) and the IDP Population Technical 
Work Group had provided an updated figure for the 
number of IDPs living in sites or camp-like settings, which 
corresponds to 2.6 million IDPs, based on the most up-to-date 
data available. 
4 Somalia UNHCR Protection and Return Monitoring 
Network (PRMN): https://bit.ly/2BrYcIU. 
5 REACH, “Joint Multi Cluster Needs Assessment (JMCNA) 
Final Report”, October 2018. 
6 REACH, “Joint Multi Cluster Needs Assessment (JMCNA)”, 
November 2017; REACH, “Drought Protection Concerns in 
IDP Sites: Joint Partner Assessment”, April 2018. 
7 UN Habitat/NRC, Eviction Trend Analysis Dashboard, 
August 2018. See also: UN Habitat/NRC, “Back to Square 
One”, December 2018; Banadir Regional Administration, 
“29/30 December 2017 Forced Eviction Committee Report”, 
April 2018. 
8 The Kampala Convention is the first regional instrument 
aimed specifically at preventing displacement, protecting and 
assisting the displaced, and identifying durable solutions. 
9 Somalia Country Task Force on Monitoring and Reporting 
Mechanisms (CTFMRM), September 2018. 
10 Ibid. 
11 Education Cluster, 2017/2018. 
12 UNICEF, Sitrep #5, September 2018. 
13 Food Security and Nutrition Analysis Unit for Somalia 
(FSNAU) and the Famine Early Warning Systems Network 
(FEWS NET) 2018 Post-Gu Technical Release, September 
2018: https://reliefweb.int/report/somalia/fsnau-fews-net- 
2018-post-gu-technical-release-01-sep-2018 
14 HNO 2019, Nutrition Section. 
15 UNICEF, Sitrep #5, September 2018. 
16 FSNAU/FEWSNET Outlook Report October 2018 - May 
2018: http://www.fsnau.org/in-focus/somalia-food-securityoutlook-
november-2018. 
17 The calculation of the number of people in need (PiN) 
in the HNO 2019 is based on vulnerability criteria by 
identifying focus populations and geographic areas. The 
focus population includes IDPs and the focus geographical 
areas include: Jubaland, South West, Hiraan (Hirshabelle), 
Awdal (Somaliland), and Banadir. While in previous years, 
the definition included the entire caseload of Integrated Phase 
Classification 2 (IPC 2) in the calculation of the total people 
in need, in 2019, the IPC 2 caseload is focused on those who 
meet the relevant vulnerability criteria, including all IDPs at 
IPC 2 level and others at the IPC 2 level who are living in the 
most vulnerable areas. Consequently, over 60 per cent of the 
total IPC 2 caseload (or 2 million people) are included in the 
4.2 million people in need of humanitarian assistance. 
18 More information on the boundaries of the Clusters’ 
response can be found in the Cluster Response Plan, Part II of 
the this HRP 
19 The 2019 HNO includes in the total PiN calculation 
those in Stress that reside mainly in southern portions 
of the country where conflict, limited governance, access 
constraints and marginalisation are more pronounced. In 
addition, IPC 2 populations that are internally displaced, 
regardless of geographic location, are also part of the intersectoral 
PiN. As a consequence, around 60 per cent of the IPC 
Phase 2 caseload has been included in the PiN calculation, 
as explained also in the annex of the 2019 HNO, on the PiN 
calculation and decrease of PiN number. 
20 The data are taken from the projects registered in the 
Project Module system within the 2019 HRP. 
21 The Durable Solutions Initiative (DSI), launched in early 
2016 and led by the Government, provides a collective 
framework for harmonising approaches to durable solutions 
to displacement by increasing understanding and developing 
common pro-gramming principles and guidance, thereby 
ensuring better consistency among actors and more efficient 
use of resources. For more information about the DSI 
approach and its achievements, see: https://bit.ly/2R8A3kr. 
22 In Baidoa, Xudur, Kismayo, Afmadow, Doolow, 
Gaarbahaarey and Balcad, Community Action Plans 
(CAPs) have been developed through a comprehensive 
community planning process facilitated by local authorities 
and community leaders, with inclusive participation 
of representatives from all segments of society - host 
communities, IDPs, returnees, marginalised clans, youth, 
and women (among others). The CAPs identify and prioritise 
community needs and their solutions and serve as authorities’ 
planning tool for coordinating interventions by humanitarian 
and development partners. CAPs will also be developed in 
several other locations under the Midnimo (Unity) Joint 
Programme. 
23 The data are taken from the projects registered in the 
Project Module system within the 2019 HRP 
24 The Peer-2-Peer mission took place between the 1 and 
13 July 2018, following an earlier STAIT mission that visited 
Somalia in November 2016. The team had discussions with 
approximately 150 people in Nairobi and Mogadishu. The 
mission also included participatory self-assessment exercises, 
with the Humanitarian Country Team (HCT), the Inter 
Cluster Coordination Group (ICCG), national NGOs in 
Mogadishu, the Area Humanitarian Team in Baidoa and 
international NGOs in Nairobi 
25 Human Rights Watch, “The Power These Men Have Over 
REFERENCES

65 
PART III - ANNEXES: references 
Us: Sexual Exploitation and Abuse by African Union Forces in 
Somalia”, September 2014. 
26 Home Office, “Country Policy and Information Note; 
Somalia: Majority clans and minority groups in south and 
central Somalia”, June 2017. 
27REACH, “Drought and Protection Concerns in IDP Sites, 
Joint Partner Assessment”, April 2018. 
28 Ibid. 
29 See the summary of needs, targets and requirements, to 
have a clear overview of the disaggregated caseload. 
30 For more information on the GAM, see: https://bit. 
ly/2rGFhpk. 
31 REACH, “Joint Multi Cluster Needs Assessment (JMCNA) 
Final Report”, October 2018. 
32 HCT Access Task Force, 2018. 
33 The RPM is available at: https://bit.ly/2Gq3p9M. 
34 For more information on the PiN calculation see the 2019 
Humanitarian Needs Overview. 
35 UNFPA, 2014 population estimates, 2014. 
36 REACH, “Joint Multi Cluster Needs Assessment (JMCNA) 
Final Report”, October 2018. 
37 Ibid. 
38 The FSC has three targets: (i) access to food and safety nets 
(1.6 million people in IPC 3-5); (ii) emergency livelihood 
support (1.0 million people in IPC 2-4); and disaster 
resilience (0.9 million people in IPC 2). These targets can 
be updated twice per year based on FSNAU seasonal food 
security assessment outcomes in March and September. The 
beneficiaries target by FSC often receive “multiple supports” 
and the three targets cannot be directly aggregated. The 
overall target of the FSC arrived at 2.7 million based on FSC 
targeting logic considering the multiple support. However, 
this overall ‘target’ is only possible to calculate at the planning 
stage, but not when using actual responses reported by 
partners. 
39 The CWG uses the FSNAU MEB as the basis for calculating 
transfer value recommendations. As per the decision of the 
CWG, transfer value recommendations will remain fixed for 
three months at a time, and only be subject to change if the 
MEB in the region changes by more than +/- 10%. 
40 FSNAU-FEWSNET, “2018 Post-Gu Technical Release”, 
September 2018. 
41 Ibid. 
42 https://bit.ly/2ECL080. 
43 FSNAU-FEWSNET, “2018 Post-Gu Technical Release”, 
September 2018. 
44 https://uni.cf/2pNsAWO. 
45 REACH, “Drought and Protection Concerns in IDP Sites: 
Joint Partner Assessment”, April, 2018. 
46 https://bit.ly/2RaGRhm 
47 https://bit.ly/2M2jlhv 
48 https://bit.ly/2BsS8jt 
49 In each table, the first indicator (or two, where relevant) 
tracks progress towards the collective outcome target 
50 The source refers to the planning framework(s) which 
track(s) each indicator. Where key indicators are not yet part 
of an existing results framework, it has been agreed that these 
will be incorporated into the results framework of the relevant 
NDP-SDRF pillar working group which are currently being 
developed (i.e. NDP-SDRF Annual Work Plan) 
51 The average IDP household is comprised of 5-6 people. 
52 Estimated absolute poverty line for Somalia based on the 
High Frequency Survey (round 1) results of 2016. 
53 Humanitarian caseload, populations on the move and 
urban poor. 
54 The indicator for sustainable access to safe water and 
sanitation is used as a proxy 
55 DG ECHO definition: ‘Social exclusion is defined as a 
process and a state that prevents individuals or groups from 
full participation in social, economic and political life and 
from asserting their rights. It derives from exclusionary 
relationships based on power resulting from social identity 
(e.g. race, gender, ethnicity, caste/clan/tribe or religion), or 
social location (areas that are remote, stigmatised or suffering 
from war/conflict).’ Other actors define it as ‘marginalized 
communities, defined by clan, culture (pastoralist vs 
agricultural), physical appearance, occupational group, or 
perceived ethnicity or caste, which are excluded from power 
and resources either on the basis of identity, or because the 
group is a minority in a particular geographic area’. 

66 
PART III - ANNEXES: references 
SITUATION 
OF PEOPLE IN 
ACUTE FOOD 
INSECURITY WOULD FURTHER 
DETERIORATE 
Without assistance, 2.6 million 
food-insecure people in Somalia 
could see their situation further 
deteriorate with potential 
irreversible impacts. Moreover, 
an inadequated assistance may 
push them to negative coping 
mechanisms, including the sale 
of crucial livelihood assets. 
LACK OF ADEQUATE 
HEALTH SERVICES 
WILL LEAD 
TO EXCESS DEATH AND 
MORBIDITY 
Women and children in Somalia 
will continue to suffer the 
world’s highest child mortality 
rate, and high risk of death 
during pregnancy. Extremely 
low vaccination coverage 
places over 700,000 children 
at risk of serious illnesses 
from preventable disease. 
Marginalised people will not 
be able to exercise their right 
to health, keeping the most 
vulnerable, such as survivors 
of gender-based violence, from 
protecting their health and wellbeing. 
PEOPLE WILL 
CONTINUE TO 
BE EXPOSED TO 
PREVENTABLE DISEASE 
OUTBREAKS 
Lack of investment in quality 
WASH infrastructure and 
services, coupled with 
recurrent disaster and massive 
displacement, would continue 
to expose 2.9 million Somali to 
water-related diseases, including 
AWD/cholera. Adequate access 
to safe water, sanitation and 
hygiene also prevent other 
communicable and preventable 
diseases, and increase the 
resilience of drought-affected 
population. 
WHAT IF? 
...WE FAIL TO RESPOND 
AN ESTIMATED 1.8 
MILLION SCHOOLAGED 
CHILDREN 
WILL REMAIN WITHOUT 
EDUCATION 
Without a substantial 
educational response, 
approximately 1.8 million 
children in Somalia will continue 
to be excluded from learning 
opportunities, hampering them 
from thriving and fulfilling all 
their potential. Moreover, access 
to education will also prevent 
children from being affected 
by other protection threats, 
as family separation, early 
marriage, child recruitment and 
child labour. 
ACUTE 
MALNUTRITION 
LEVELS WILL SHARPLY 
INCREASE, CAUSING EXCESS 
MORTALITY 
If there is no substantial 
nutrition response, and the 
climatic situation stays stable, 
levels of acute malnutrition are 
expected to increase by 50 per 
cent. If there is no response, 
and the situation deteriorates, 
projections indicate that the 
current acute malnutrition 
burden may double, leading to 
avoidable high mortality which 
will disproportionately affect 
children under the age of five. 
DISPLACED 
POPULATION 
WILL REMAIN 
VULNERABLE TO PROTECTION 
RISKS 
Should this plan be 
underfunded, 1.6 million people 
will remain without adequate 
shelter or non-food items, 
leaving them further exposed 
to protection risks and increase 
their vulnerability. Moreover, 
the continuing heavy influx of 
IDPs into urban centres will 
further hamper accessibility to 
basic services, while the quality 
of those services will severely 
suffer.

GUIDE TO GIVING 
HRP 
Financial contributions to reputable aid agencies are one of the most valuable and effective forms of 
response in humanitarian emergencies. This page indicates several ways to channel funding towards 
famine prevention response in Somalia. 
SOMALIA HUMANITARIAN FUND (SHF) 
The Somalia Humanitarian Fund (SHF) – a country-based pooled fund (CBPF) – enables humanitarian 
partners to deliver timely, flexible and effective life-saving assistance to people who need it most. It allows 
Governments and private donors to pool their contributions to support specific emergencies. The SHF is 
inclusive and promotes partnership. Donors that prefer the humanitarian coordination system on the ground 
to channel their funds to the best-positioned operational agencies can use the SHF. www.unocha.org/ 
somalia/shf. SHF channels funds directly to UN agencies, national and international NGOs and Red Cross/ 
Red Crescent organizations. 
Please click https://gms.unocha.org/content/cbpf-contributions to see contributions to and funding from the 
OCHA-managed pooled funds. 
HUMANITARIAN RESPONSE PLAN 
Humanitarian Response Plans (HRPs) are developed on the ground, based on solid analysis of response 
contexts and engagement with national and international humanitarian partners, enhanced links to recovery 
and development frameworks and, where possible, multi-year plans. 
The HRP for Somalia is designed based on a broad spectrum of assessed humanitarian needs. The full 
plan, and contact details of the operational agencies that need funds, are available here: https://www. 
humanitarianresponse.info/en/operations/somalia 
CENTRAL EMERGENCY RESPONSE FUND 
The Central Emergency Response Fund (CERF) is a fast and effective way to support rapid humanitarian 
response. During the World Humanitarian Summit, the Secretary-General called for total annual CERF 
contributions of one billion dollars as of 2018. CERF provides immediate funding for life-saving humanitarian 
action at the onset of emergencies and for crises that have not attracted sufficient funding. Contributions are 
welcome year-round, from governments, private companies, foundations, charities and individuals. 
In 2018, CERF allocated $17 million to support response to the lingering impact of drought in nothern 
Somalia, and floods and the south-central part of the country. To ensure the Fund is able to sustain its support 
to the humanitarian response in Somalia in 2019, donors are encouraged to make their contribution to CERF 
as early as possible. 
TO CONTRIBUTE 
Individuals, corporations and 
foundations who would like to 
contribute to the humanitarian 
response in Somalia can click here 
http://bit.ly/2oXKj12 to 
contribute directly to SHF. 
Member States, observers and 
other authorities that wish to 
contribute to SHF can also 
contact: 
Justin Brady, bradyj@un.org 
Matija Kovac, kovacm@un.org 
REGISTERING AND RECOGNIZING YOUR CONTRIBUTIONS 
Reporting contributions through FTS enhances transparency and accountability, and recognizes 
generous contributions. It also helps identify crucial funding gaps. Please report contributions to 
fts@un.org or by completing the online form at fts.unocha.org. Thank you.

This document is produced on behalf of the Humanitarian Country Team and partners. 
This document provides the Humanitarian Country Team’s shared understanding of the crisis, including the most pressing 
humanitarian needs, and reflects its joint humanitarian response planning. 
The designation employed and the presentation of material on this report do not imply the expression of any opinion 
whatsoever on the part of the Humanitarian Country Team and partners concerning the legal status of any country, territory, 
city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. 
www.unocha.org/somalia 
www.humanitarianresponse.info/en/operations/somalia 
@OCHASomalia

