CENTRAL AFRICAN 
REPUBLIC 
DEC 2018 
2019
HUMANITARIAN 
RESPONSE PLAN 
JANUARY-DECEMBER 2019

02 
PARTIE I: . . 
TCHAD 
CONGO 
SOUDAN
SOUDAN DU SUD 
CAMEROUN 
REPUBLIQUE DEMOCRATIQUE 
DU CONGO 
MBOMOU 
HAUTE-KOTTO 
VAKAGA 
KÉMO HAUT-MBOMOU 
BAMINGUI-BANGORAN 
OUHAM 
OUAKA 
LOBAYE 
OUHAM PENDÉ 
OMBELLA M'POKO 
MAMBÉRÉ-KADÉÏ 
NANA-MAMBÉRÉ 
NANA-GRIBIZI 
BASSE-KOTTO 
SANGHA-MBAÉRÉ 
Bangui 
45,614 
53,336 22,830 
107,029 
1,526 
11,672 
108,531 
6,437 
48 202 
49,192 
16,070 
85,431 
17,425 
14,406 7,758 
2,857 
44,526 
Internal displaced 
persons (Sep 2018) 
Source: CMP, UNHCR 
Refugees 
264,578 173,136 
99,651 
31,688 
2,221 
1,877 
TOTAL 
POPULATION 
4.6M 
PEOPLE 
IN NEED 
2.9M 
TARGETED 
PEOPLE 
1.7M 
BUDGET (US$) 
.
430.7M 
# HUMANITARIAN 
PARTNERS 
139

03 
PARTIE I: . 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
PART I: COUNTRY STRATEGY 
Foreword by the Humanitarian Coordinator .................. 05 
The humanitarian response plan at a glance ................. 07 
Overview of the crisis ........................................................ 08 
Strategic objectives ............................................................ 11 
Response strategy .............................................................. 13 
Operational capacity .......................................................... 17 
Humanitarian access .......................................................... 18 
Response monitoring ......................................................... 22 
Summary of needs, targets & requirements ................... 23 
PART II: OPERATIONAL; RESPONSE PLANS 
SHELTER/NFI/CCCM .......................................................... 26 
WATER, HYGIENE AND SANITATION ............................. 28 
EDUCATION ....................................................................... 31 
LOGISTICS ........................................................................... 34 
LIVELIHOODS AND COMMUNITY STABILISATION ......... 36 
NUTRITION .......................................................................... 39 
PROTECTION ...................................................................... 42 
HEALTH ............................................................................... 47 
FOOD SECURITY ............................................................... 51 
EMERGENCY TELECOMUNICATIONS ........................... 54 
COORDINATION ................................................................ 56 
REFUGEES .......................................................................... 58 
Bamingui-Bangoran 
Bangui 
Basse-Kotto 45 614 
Haut-Mbomou 
Haute-Kotto 
Kémo 
Lobaye 
Mambéré-Kadéï 
Mbomou 
Nana-Gribizi 
Nana-Mambéré 
Ombella-Mpoko 
Ouaka 
Ouham 
Ouham-Pendé 
Sangha-Mbaéré 
Vakaga 

04 
PARTIE I: . . 
Donor guide ........................................................................ 60 
PART III: ANNEXES 
OBJECTIVES, INDICATORS & TARGETS ......................... 62 
What if? ... we fail to respond ........................................... 80 
What if? ... we fail to respond ........................................... 81 
Acronyms ............................................................................. 83

05 
PARTIE I: FOREWORD BY THE HUMANITARIAN COORDINATOR 
FOREWORD BY 
THE HUMANITARIAN 
COORDINATOR 
Since my arrival in the Central African Republic (CAR) two 
years ago, I have witnessed the suffering of an exhausted 
population, but also its admirable resilience, the many 
achievements of the humanitarian response, the frustrations 
that have accompanied them and the ongoing operational gaps 
and challenges. I have also witnessed first-hand the courage and 
dedication of humanitarian staff as well as their unwavering 
commitment to the people of CAR, in a context that is very 
often fragile and challenging. 
Unfortunately, CAR is facing a new cycle of violence, which 
has spread to several regions of the country, including areas 
considered relatively stable, generating growing humanitarian 
needs and sometimes reversing the fragile results and progress 
already achieved. Civilians, particularly women and children, 
continue to suffer from the consequences of the conflict 
and are increasingly exposed to protection risks and acute 
humanitarian needs. Population’s vulnerabilities have increased 
in all sectors: one person out of five is displaced, 2.9 million 
Central Africans need multifaceted assistance to survive and 
protection, representing 63 per cent of the population. One 
child out of three suffers from severe malnutrition, 13 per cent 
of the population is at level 4 of food insecurity in a country 
where agriculture should feed the entire population. 
The lack of progress in the political process and in peace 
building, attacks by armed groups in many parts of the 
country, the low deployment of the State, the persistence of 
community tensions or conflicts, insistent threats to social 
cohesion, the instrumentalization of religion and ethnicity as 
well as impunity are all factors that could lead to an increase in 
violence in 2019. 
Following a worrying upsurge in attacks against civilians 
and public infrastructures, including health centers, as well 
as acts of violence against humanitarian actors, I reiterate my 
strong condemnation of these cowardly acts against unarmed 
and deprived civilians and I call on all parties to meet their 
obligations under human rights and international humanitarian 
law, as well as to facilitate safe and unhindered humanitarian 
access for all. 
Thanks to the generosity of donors in 2018, to whom I express 
my gratitude, we were able to collectively save lives and help 
hundreds of thousands of people, despite the security, logistical 
and access challenges. What motivates us in our daily mission 
are the stars of hope that we see being born in the eyes of 
the women, men, youth and children that we meet and assist 
every day on the ground. For the Humanitarian Coordinator 
that I am and with the support of the UNOCHA team and the 
collective work of the United Nations Agencies, international 
and national NGOs, contributing to these stars is the energy 
that motivates us and guides our actions. 
In our 2019 Humanitarian Response Plan, we placed the 
protection of civilian populations, in particular the most 
vulnerable groups, and accountability to the affected 
populations at the center of our actions. In 2019, the 
humanitarian response will focus in particular on protection 
integration and mainstreaming in all its interventions, on the 
compliance and strengthening of humanitarian principles, on 
greater proximity for rapid and effective assistance to affected 
populations and on improving the quality of the response. 
Our response strategy will be built around three pillars: 1) 
prioritization - including a detailed analysis of the severity of 
needs at the sectoral and inter-sectoral levels; 2) improvement 
and implementation of an integrated humanitarian response; 3) 
decentralization and increase in the humanitarian presence as 
close as possible to the affected populations. 
We need US$430.7 million to target 1.7 million extremely 
vulnerable people. We have conducted a clear, solid 
prioritization, taken into account our response capacities, 
and strengthened our activities. To the best of our ability, we 
aim for life-saving assistance that preserves human dignity 
and access to essential services for the population where 
humanitarian needs are most acute. We will strengthen 
links with recovery and development efforts that should be 
funded through mechanisms other than the Humanitarian 
Response Plan in order to maximize the complementarity of 
our interventions and funding. It is only by working together 
that we will achieve collective results and improve the living 
conditions of the population. 
In 2019, we must not only maintain but also increase 
humanitarian efforts, and I turn once again to donors to urge 
them to intensify their support and strengthen their solidarity 
with vulnerable populations in the Central African Republic. 
Humanitarian aid is not the solution to the situation of the 

06 
PARTIE I: FOREWORD BY THE HUMANITARIAN COORDINATOR 
Central African population. However, it is the only hope for 
millions of affected people. Help us not to disappoint Nina, 
Yakoubou, Khadija, Theodore, and all the other faces that 
motivate our action every day on the ground. We remain 
determined, committed and mobilized in our mission to 
alleviate suffering and restore hope to the children, women and 
men of the Central African Republic. It is certainly the duty 
to assist, but it is also the duty to preserve an opportunity for 
lasting peace and above all, it is the duty of hope for all of us, 
humanitarian workers. Thank you. 
Najat Rochdi 
Coordonnateur Humanitaire 
Photo: OCHA/Gemma.C

07 
PARTIE I: THE HUMANITARIAN RESPONSE PLAN AT A GLANCE 
THE HUMANITARIAN RESPONSE PLAN 
AT A GLANCE 
PEOPLE IN NEED 
2.9M 
REQUIREMENTS (US$) (USD) 
430.7M 
TARGETED PEOPLE 
1.7M 
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 1 
Save Lives 
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 3 
Preserve Human 
Dignity 
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 2 
Respect Basic 
Rights 
OPERATIONAL PRESENCE AND SEVERITY OF NEEDS 
PEOPLE WHO NEED OF HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE 
2.9M 
MBOMOU 
HAUTE-KOTTO 
VAKAGA 
OUHAM OUHAM 
PENDE OUAKA HAUTKÉMO 
MBOMOU 
O. 
MPOKO 
B.-BANGORAN 
LOBAYE 
N. 
GRIBIZI 
BASSEKOTTO 
BANGUI 
S. 
MBAERE 
MAMBERE 
KADEI 
N. 
MAMBERE 
400,000 
200,000 
30,000 
INTERNAL DISPLACED PERSONS 
643k 
REFUGIÉS 
575k 
Targeted people People in need 
2.7M 
2.3M 
1.9M 
2.4M
1.8M 
2.5M 
2.9M 
1.7M 
1.9M 2M 
2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 
NEEDS TREND FUNDS REQUIRED BY CLUSTER IN 2019 
TCHAD 
REPUBLIQUE DEMOCRATIQUE 
DU CONGO 
SOUDAN 
CONGO 
CAMEROUN 
SOUDAN DU SUD 
Ouaka 
Haute-Kotto 
Ouham 
Mbomou 
Vakaga 
Haut-Mbomou 
Bamingui-Bangoran 
Kémo 
Lobaye 
Ouham 
Pendé 
Ombella M'Poko 
Mambéré-Kadéï 
Nana-Mambéré 
Nana-Gribizi 
Basse-Kotto 
Sangha-Mbaéré 
Bangui 
64 
19
25 
2 
7 
12 
19 
57 
32 
75 
29 
24
21 
10 
30 
21
20 
Sources: Partenaires humanitaires 
Sévérité des besoins 
— + 
# d’organisations humanitaires présentes 
²² 238,996 IDPs on sites. 
. 
²² 403,846 IDPs in host communities 
Central african refugees 
²² 76% Central african refugees are in 
Cameroon or in DRC 
²² 24% are in Chad, Congo, Sudan or 
South Sudan. 
168M 
40 39 35 29 26 23 22 22 12 12 2 
FS EDU PROT WASH HEAL NUT REF SHEL LOG LIVEL COO TEL 
FA: 
PROT: 
SHEL: 
HEAL: 
LIVEL: 
WAS: 
EDU: 
LOG: 
NUT: 
REF: 
COO: 
TEL: 
Food Security 
Protection 
SHELTER/NFI/CCCM 
HEALTH 
Livelihoods and community stabilisation 
Water, Hygiene and Sanitation 
Education 
Logistics 
Nutrition 
Non-sectoral response for Refugees 
Coordination and services 
Telecommunications 
(at 30 Oct 2018) 
(at 30 Oct 2018) 
People in need of assistance

08 
PARTIE I: OVERVIEW OF THE CRISIS 
HUMANITARIAN NEEDS 
Protection of civilians 
Needs generated by population 
movements 
Access to essential services 
The Central African Republic (CAR) is the third-largest 
humanitarian crisis in the world, after Yemen and Syria, 
according to the proportion of the total population in need of 
humanitarian assistance. According to the 2019 Humanitarian 
Needs Overview (HNO), 2.9 million Central Africans, more 
than half of whom are children, are in need of humanitarian 
and protection assistance, i.e. a 16 per cent increase over 
the previous year. Some 1.6 million people have acute and 
immediate humanitarian needs. Despite a certain lull in some 
localities, which facilitated the return of more than 230,000 
people to their places of origin, there has been ongoing forced 
displacement in several regions of the country throughout 
2018. As of 30 September 2018, more than 640,000 internally 
displaced people were reported throughout the country and 
the number of Central African refugees rose from 542,896 to 
573,242. Two thirds of IDPs are housed in host families and 
one third resides in 77 sites. 
Underlying Causes of the Crisis 
The underlying causes of violence are multiple. Conflict 
indicators are political and economic, translating into ethnic, 
religious and inter-community tensions used for political 
purposes. Some armed groups have reached a level of 
organization and access to resources that consolidated their 
power, and enabled them to arm themselves and spread their 
control. At the same time, the fragmentation of some groups 
can also be observed. Armed groups operate in more than half 
of the country and organize parallel systems or replace the State 
in some areas where its services are decentralized. 
Ranked 187th on the 2018 Human Development Index, CAR is 
second to last before Niger (188). 
The redeployment of the State, although it has begun, is not yet 
effective over a large part of the national territory. Therefore, 
the Central African State’s capacity to respond to the crisis 
remains very limited. In many regions, access to basic social 
services, such as education and health, remains predominantly 
provided by humanitarian partners. 
The phenomenon of transhumance (i.e, cattle migration) is 
also a destabilizing factor in the north-west (Bouar-Bocaranga- 
Baboua region), the west (Berberati region, Gamboula, Amada- 
Gaza), the center-west (Bossembéle-Yaloké region), the centereast 
(Kouango-Bambari-Alindao-Kembé region), the north 
of the Ouham Prefecture and in Nana-Gribizi. During these 
periods, an increase in crime and violence is observed. 
Impact of the crisis 
Serious violations and abuses of human rights law and 
international humanitarian law continue to be perpetrated in 
a context of impunity, which exacerbates tensions in several 
areas of the country. 
A crisis of protection: The crisis is foremost a protection one, 
and requires the commitment of all parties to the protection of 
civilians. Between January and September 2018, 9,214 incidents 
related to protection were reported, i.e. an average of more 
than 1,000 incidents per month. 
Attacks against health personnel, facilities and schools: 
Between January 2017 and October 2018, 14 health facilities 
and 89 schools were attacked, with a worrying trend in 
2018 also involving incidents against educational personnel. 
OVERVIEW OF 
THE CRISIS 
Despite peace-building efforts, CAR is sinking into a cycle of violence, which has 
spread into several areas of the country, including regions considered relatively 
stable, creating growing humanitarian needs and fear that the country will plunge 
into chaos. One in five people are displaced, while 63 per cent of the Central African 
population is in dire need of humanitarian assistance and protection. 

09 
PARTIE I: OVERVIEW OF THE CRISIS 
Similarly, the number of incidents against humanitarian actors 
has increased alarmingly. As of 31 October 2018, some 338 
incidents against humanitarian actors were recorded, which is 
higher than the number recorded throughout 2017 (333). 
Persistence of GBV cases: Women and children also continue 
to pay the heavy price of violence. A large number of women 
have been victims of violence. Indeed, from January to 
August 2018, 5,733 cases of gender-based violence (GBV) 
were recorded in the Gender-Based Violence Information 
Management System (GBVIMS), 21 per cent of which were 
cases of sexual violence. 
Increase in internal displacement: The persistence of 
conflicts has led more than one million Central Africans to 
leave their homes either forcibly (fire/destruction of houses) 
or preemptively. As of 30 September 2018, the Commission 
on Population Movement (CMP) reported 643,396 internally 
displaced persons, while UNHCR reported 573,242 refugees 
in neighboring countries. More than half of the displaced are 
children. In 2018, an increasing number of unaccompanied and 
separated children (704) were identified as a result of forced 
population displacements. 
The categories of populations most affected by the crisis remain 
displaced persons, returnees, host families and populations 
remaining in conflict areas. 
For example, in IDP sites, the prevalence rate of global acute 
malnutrition (GAM) is above the emergency threshold in 16 
out of 18 sites, i.e. 5/5 in Obo (Haut Mbomou), 3/4 in Alindao 
(Basse Kotto) and 8/9 in Bambari (Ouaka) (SMART survey 
2017-2018). In more than 70 sites and many host families, 
IDPs’ access to water, hygiene and sanitation (WASH) has 
deteriorated significantly during 2018 due to insufficient 
funding and the withdrawal of some humanitarian actors. Poor 
hygiene conditions, poor primary health care coverage and 
crowded sites and foster families increase the risk of disease 
spread and outbreaks of epidemics. Makeshift shelters in 
which displaced persons find refuge do not provide sufficient 
protection against bad weather and animal bites, exposing them 
to immediate health risks. 
40 per cent of the population affected by food insecurity: 1.9 
million Central Africans, or 40% of the population, are food 
insecure (IPC phases 3 & 4), while only 54% of households have 
access to drinking water and 34% practice open-air defecation, 
due to the country’s poor drinking water coverage and low 
level of hygiene infrastructure. 
The crisis has severely reduced access to essential services. In 
October 2016, out of the 1,010 health facilities in the country, 
236 (23 per cent) still bore the wounds of the crisis (partial 
or total destruction). While some of these damaged health 
facilities have been rehabilitated, others were destroyed in 2017 
and 2018. To date, only 48 per cent (485) of the nutritional care 
units are operational and 340 schools are non-functional, 28 
of which are occupied by internally displaced people or armed 
groups. Chronic malnutrition affects 4 out of 10 children under 
five years of age. In 2018, the country recorded three outbreaks 
of acute watery diarrhea, one outbreak of typhoid fever, one 
outbreak of Hepatitis E, one outbreak of whooping cough and 
two outbreaks of monkey pox. 
Major challenges in the humanitarian response 
Essential services: Upon the collapse of the State’s structures 
over a large part of the country following the 2013 conflict, the 
humanitarian community is compelled to continue to replace 
the State in order to ensure access to essential services. 
Insecurity and limited access: Infrastructure destruction, 
confrontations between armed groups, attacks against the 
civilian population and infrastructures, as well as incidents 
against humanitarian actors have affected humanitarian access 
and operations. In 2018, six` humanitarian workers lost their 
lives and 21 others were wounded. Between January and 
October 2018, 20 organizations had to temporarily withdraw 
from their intervention areas, depriving the population of vital 
assistance. Hostilities have spread to new areas, some of which 
are extremely difficult to access for security as well as logistical 
reasons (villages far from major urban centers, etc.), making 
assessment missions and humanitarian response difficult. 
Delayed implementation of economic and social recovery: The 
impoverishment of communities remains alarming throughout 
the country. The delays in implementing and operationalizing 
the activities of the Peace Recovery and Consolidation 
Plan in CAR (RCPCA) and the lack of support for the basic 
socio-economic sectors keep several regions of the country 
dependent on humanitarian assistance, while increasing the 
risk of falling back into the humanitarian crisis in other areas. 
Underfunding of humanitarian action: Chronic underfunding 
affects the ability of humanitarian actors to respond to 
the increasingly urgent needs of the population. As of 10 
November 2018, US$222 million have been mobilized for the 
2018 Humanitarian Response Plan (HRP), i.e. only 43 per cent 
of the required funds1. 
1. Financial Tracking Service, 10 november 2018

10 
PARTIE I: PLANNING ASSUMPTIONS THE CRISIS 
PLANNING ASSUMPTIONS 
The current socio-economic and political indicators 
indicate that the humanitarian situation could deteriorate 
further in 2019. The lack of progress in the political 
process, the activities of armed groups and their lack of 
structure in several regions of the country, the weak 
and insufficient deployment of the State, the tensions 
between communities, the lack of social cohesion, and 
the persistence of intercommunity conflicts are factors 
that signal the possible intensification of the cycle of 
violence in 2019. In an environment of impunity, forced 
population movements are therefore likely to continue. 
Attacks against civilians and humanitarian actors are 
also likely to continue and increase, which could lead to a 
reduction in the presence of humanitarian actors in areas 
where needs are more acute. 
In some areas, such as Bangui and some locations in the west of 
the country (Paoua, Bocaranga) and in the east (Bangassou), the 
situation could improve if recent stabilization achievements 
are preserved. In the meantime, humanitarian 
actors will have to take into account 
the potential risks associated with 
the elections, which could impact 
both in the capital city and in 
relatively stable areas of the 
country, particularly in the 
absence of concrete progress 
in the peace process and the 
implementation of the 
RCPCA. 
Photo: OCHA/V. BERO

11 
PARTIE I: STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES 
STRATEGIC 
OBJECTIVES 
The humanitarian community has maintained the multi-year strategic objectives 
adopted by CAR for 2017-2019. The response will focus on three strategic objectives: 
Within their capacities, humanitarian actors strive to provide 
life-saving assistance that preserves human dignity and access 
to essential services for the population where humanitarian 
needs are most acute. Humanitarian actors have decided to 
focus their actions on the protection of civilians, particularly 
the most vulnerable groups, and accountability to affected 
populations. As a result, communication with affected 
communities and existing feedback mechanisms will be 
expanded and strengthened, contributing to decision-making at 
all levels of the humanitarian coordination. 
In 2019, the humanitarian response will focus on protection 
integration and mainstreaming into all interventions, 
respecting and strengthening humanitarian principles, while 
improving proximity for rapid and effective assistance to 
affected populations, as well as enhancing the quality of the 
response in a complex operational context and with decreasing 
financial resources. 
Save Lives Respect Basic 
Rights 
Preserve Human 
Dignity 
1 2 3 
HUMANITARIAN PRINCIPLES 
PROTECTION 
OUTREACH 
ACCESS 
QUALITY

12 
PARTIE I: PLANNING ASSUMPTIONS OBJECTIVES 
Photo: OCHA/Y. Sène

13 
PARTIE I: RESPONSE STRATEGY 
RESPONSE 
STRATEGY 
The Central African Republic (CAR) continues to experience a complex humanitarian 
crisis, characterized by protracted internal conflict that requires a robust and 
coherent humanitarian positioning. Humanitarian action must, more than ever, 
be implemented in accordance with its guiding humanitarian principles and the 
centrality of protection, in an approach based on proximity to the most vulnerable 
people. 
The response strategy is focused on: 1) Prioritization - 
including a detailed analysis of the severity of needs at 
the sectoral and inter-sectoral levels, which has led to the 
definition of credible targets; 2) improved implementation 
and integrated response, by expanding needs assessments and 
capitalizing cross-cutting themes, such as protection, gender, 
cash and accountability to affected populations at the level of 
sectoral activities; 3) decentralization and increased presence 
and response to emergencies, thanks to investments aimed at 
improving access and pooling resources. 
In 2019, $430.7 million will be required to meet the needs 
of 1.7 million people. The funding request represents a 
16 per cent reduction compared to 2018, following a clear 
prioritization and tightening of the proposed activities around 
the objective of saving lives, with a reduction in recovery 
and even development activities, which should be funded 
through mechanisms other than the HRP. Improvements in 
data collection, analysis and methodology have also made it 
possible to more accurately estimate targets and the number of 
people in need at both the sectoral and cross-sectoral levels. An 
analysis of the interventions carried out by development and 
recovery actors was also conducted in order to strengthen the 
links between humanitarian and development, while avoiding 
duplication in the definition of targets and funding requests. 
Prioritization and quality of the response 
The humanitarian response will continue to focus on lifesaving 
in accordance with humanitarian principles, by ensuring 
protection mainstreaming in all interventions. Emphasis will 
be placed on the quality of the response. 
Humanitarian assistance (in-kind, services and cash) will be 
provided on the basis of the sectoral and intersectoral severity 
thresholds defined by the different clusters. For areas that are 
difficult to access, the access strategy will allow adjusting the 
modalities of intervention. Humanitarian actors will ensure 
that road access opportunities are enhanced and will only use 
airplanes as a last resort. 
The CAR context is marked by considerable humanitarian 
needs, but which root causes are due to an acute development 
problem and the protracted conflict. The humanitarian needs 
analysis allowed classifying the populations of the country’s 
sub-prefectures on a six-level scale of severity. Therefore, the 
humanitarian response in 2019 will focus mainly on areas with 
a severity scale of 3 to 6 at both sectoral and intersectoral levels. 
In areas with a severity scale of 2 to 0, improved coordination 
with recovery/development actors will be ensured to enable a 
smooth transition with humanitarian interventions, as well as 
to ensure the implementation of bridging activities. 
In order to guarantee a quality humanitarian response in 2019, 
the humanitarian community is committed to conducting 
more assessments based on the information gaps identified 
in the HNO, strengthening the dissemination and application 
of standards (such as the SPHERE standards), integrating the 
“do no harm” approach into interventions and improving 
response monitoring to make the necessary adjustments. 
The ICC will work on improving data collection and analysis 
tools, while harmonizing the existing ones. Namely, training 
of humanitarian staff on protection mainstreaming and 
humanitarian principles, combined with conflict-sensitive 
programming, will be prioritized. The use of existing feedback 
mechanisms will be improved, while the creation of new 
feedback mechanisms will also be encouraged in cases where 
affected populations are not yet involved. 
Integrated and multisectoral response strategies 
The intersectoral analysis has allowed identifying areas of 
humanitarian need in several sectors. In 2019, coordinated 
efforts will be made by the humanitarian community to 
ensure integrated assistance to affected populations with 
severe multisectoral needs. Although some clusters are already 

14 
PARTIE I: Cross-cutting themes STRATEGY 
working in this direction, formal multisectoral strategies will 
have to be elaborated at both national and local levels to ensure 
an effective and efficient response. The implementation of 
multisectoral projects will be based on the context and needs 
identified as well as the presence, capacities and expertise of the 
actors working in these areas. In terms of funding, advocacy 
will also be conducted with donors in order to obtain more 
flexible funding for the implementation of multisectoral 
projects. 
Decentralization and humanitarian action scaleup 
The humanitarian community will continue to strengthen 
its regional coordination structures in order to enable rapid 
and targeted decision-making. It will also strengthen its 
assessment and rapid response capacities to respond to the 
increase in conflict areas and contextual volatility, including 
through the strengthening of an early warning system, regular 
updates of regional and national emergency preparedness 
plans, harmonization of rapid assessment tools, regular 
updates of stock status, complementarity in the response and 
implementation of the emergency response team, and staff 
training. 
It is worth mentioning the existing mechanisms that constitute 
crisis management bodies and ensure better coordination 
and a faster and more effective response, including the Rapid 
Response Mechanism (RRM), which has been operating in 
the country since 2013. The RRM will continue to support the 
humanitarian community in responding to emergencies in the 
country. In 2019, the RRM plans to increase its operational 
capacity in order to maintain its humanitarian monitoring, 
multisectoral assessment (MSA) and rapid response capacity to 
urgent needs identified following a shock with humanitarian 
consequences within a three-month window. The RRM will 
operate in the most remote areas, in close coordination with 
the relevant clusters. In addition, the RRM will be able to 
extend alternative approaches where possible, such as NFI fairs 
and cash transfers. 
Links with Recovery and Development Actors 
In 2016, the Humanitarian Country Team (HCT) decided to 
develop a three-year Humanitarian Response Plan (HRP), 
covering the period 2017-2019, to better align with the 
ongoing development strategy planning (RCPCA). In 2018, 
the intersectoral analysis conducted by clusters as part of 
the humanitarian needs analysis revealed the persistence of 
humanitarian needs to varying degrees in the country’s subprefectures, 
particularly with regard to security, the conditions 
for protecting the population, access and the physical and 
operational conditions of essential infrastructure. 
Guiding principles have been identified to ensure that the 
HRP is more relevant to the operational context, but also to 
better link it to recovery activities (RCPCA) in order to avoid 
duplication and initiate the gradual transfer of responsibilities 
to national authorities as soon as possible in order to provide 
basic social and protection services. 
The implementation of these principles will also allow for 
a more precise delimitation of activities in the respective 
humanitarian and recovery areas, while maintaining 
flexibility according to context, needs and capacities. The 
operationalization of activities under RCPCA in 2019 will 
be critical in order not to further jeopardize the gains made 
through the humanitarian response. Coordination and 
consultations conducted1 at the end of 2018 through the New 
Way of Working (NWoW) will continue and be strengthened 
to ensure the implementation of a collective roadmap to move 
forward on common outcomes. 
Given that CAR is still in an acute humanitarian crisis, the 
transition to development and recovery projects must not 
be at the expense of sustained and continued support for the 
humanitarian response. Improved coordination between 
funding mechanisms remains necessary and will be one of the 
priorities in 2019 in order to operationalize the New Way of 
Working approved at the World Humanitarian Summit in 
2016. The HCT will renew its engagement with donors to 
determine the best financial mechanisms to address funding 
shortfalls, as well as to monitor weaknesses resulting from 
insufficient coordination between actors in charge of delivering 
aid and updating programs. 
CROSS-CUTTING THEMES 
The centrality of protection 
En 2018, l’EHP a élaboré une stratégie de protection afin 
d’assurer une réponse appropriée aux besoins des populations 
à risque et des populations affectées. Toutefois cette stratégie 
sera révisée en 2019 afin de prendre en compte la détérioration 
de la situation humanitaire. La réponse humanitaire prendra 
en compte les violences basées sur le genre, la réintégration 
des enfants sortis des groupes armés et les droits fonciers 
des personnes déplacées et retournées. La communauté 
humanitaire garantira l’intégration effective de la protection 
de façon transversale dans les programmes et projets, à travers 
un renforcement des capacités de l’ensemble des acteurs 
humanitaires et en garantissant un accès équitable à toute 
la population dans le besoin. Le Groupe de Travail mis en 
place sur la protection transversale conduira ces formations 
et fournira un appui technique aux membres des clusters 
pour assurer l’intégration transversale de la protection dans 
les activités de chaque cluster. Les évaluations et analyses 
des risques de protection seront réalisées en amont de la 
conception des projets et suivies tout au long de la mise en 
oeuvre. 
Simultanément, la communauté humanitaire va poursuivre son 
plaidoyer afin de maintenir et de réaffirmer la notion d’espace 
humanitaire comme espace neutre et impartial pour permettre 
aux acteurs humanitaires d’avoir un accès sans entrave aux 
1. Nexus Workshop, Bangui, October 15-16

15 
PARTIE I: Cross-cutting themes STRATEGY 
populations vulnérables. 
Accountability to affected populations 
Women, men, girls and boys affected by the crisis in CAR are 
also part of the humanitarian response and therefore have the 
fundamental right to participate in decisions that affect them, 
their lives and their daily activities. Affected populations have 
the right to full and transparent information, enabling them to 
make informed decisions about the responses offered to them 
and to submit claims whenever they believe that the assistance 
received is inappropriate or has adverse consequences on their 
well-being and safety. The 4040 hotline initiative will continue 
and other initiatives, such as the establishment of grievance 
reporting and management mechanisms and communication 
with communities, will continue to be improved in order to 
strengthen accountability to affected populations, taking into 
account context, age and gender. An accountability framework 
at the level of the HCT will also be adopted. 
In September 2018, a protocol on sexual exploitation and abuse 
(PSEA) was signed to ensure zero tolerance and fight SEA. In 
2019, the SEA network will continue to implement the 2018- 
2019 action plan under the HCT, which focuses on four main 
areas: prevention, engagement with affected communities, 
response and support to victims and coordination. 
Under the RRM, accountability to affected populations will 
continue to be strengthened through the following actions: 
1) monitoring of humanitarian aid distributions provided by 
RRM partners through rapid perception surveys of affected 
communities, through the U-report platform or other 
community-based mechanism; 2) collection of beneficiaries’ 
perceptions; 3) systematic post-distribution evaluations 
conducted after each NFI distribution or HCT intervention. 
A response adapted and accessible to affected 
populations according to gender and the 
specificities of vulnerable groups 
Given that conflicts and crisis situations have profoundly 
different impacts on women, girls, boys and men, humanitarian 
actors will need to ensure that all these categories of people are 
consulted separately during the needs analysis. At each stage, 
humanitarian actors will be careful to collect and report gender 
and age-disaggregated data. To this end, each cluster will 
develop indicators that will ensure the involvement of women, 
children, the elderly and people with special needs in their 
activities. These indicators should be monitored by all cluster 
members. 
Age and gender will be key criteria when allocating funds from 
the CAR Humanitarian Fund. The gender and age marker 
index threshold for all projects submitted to the humanitarian 
fund should be 4. 
Cash-Based Transfers (CBTs) 
In CAR, CBTs represent a modality of intervention that is 
often limited to sectoral and geographical levels due to factors 
such as insecurity, which hinders the free movement of 
traders and the population in general, as well as the limitation 
of trade flows in certain areas of the country. The lack of 
market integration limits competition, while the penetration 
of the banking system is low and access to financial services 
remains a major challenge, including access to credit. Similarly, 
low penetration rates of mobile services are hindering the 
expansion of access to financial services through mobile 
technologies. In order to strengthen and institutionalize 
the practices of potential monetary interventions, the Cash 
Working Group (CWG) analyzed the preconditions for 
the implementation of CBTs, the measures to manage the 
corresponding risks and the possibility of multisectoral 
interventions. 
Preconditions for the implementation of CBTs 
In CAR, the conditions identified by humanitarian actors to 
start CBTs include: a favorable security context, the existence 
and proper functioning of markets, understanding and 
acceptance of beneficiaries, the capacity of the infrastructure 
to meet the demand and increase the supply, the availability 
of microfinance infrastructure, the capacity of implementing 
partners in cash transfers, the ability of partners to monitor 
prices before and after distributions, and a protection risk 
analysis for beneficiaries and suppliers. 
Risk management measures associated with the 
implementation of CBTs 
Before launching CBTs, according to the “do no harm” 
principle and while respecting the centrality of protection, 
security measures must be considered through the planning 
process in collaboration with the authorities present in the 
area. In line with accountability to affected populations, it 
is essential to establish a channel of communication with 
communities, including a grievance mechanism, and to 
adapt payment systems to the context. In order to reduce the 
risks associated with market systems, before a cash transfer 
intervention it is important to conduct a market and price 
assessment, strengthen collaboration with actors who make 
non-monetary interventions to avoid duplication of efforts, 
and raise awareness among traders and beneficiaries. In order 
to mitigate financial service risks, it is important to diversify 
service providers and explore or strengthen collaboration 
with the private sector. In order to increase access to financial 
services, it was also proposed to use offline systems, as well as 
to advocate for improved coverage of telephone companies in 
certain areas to allow electronic payments (mobile money and 
e-voucher). 
Prospects for multisectoral CBTs 
A series of activities began in 2018 and will continue in 2019 to 
promote a multisectoral CBT approach. The operationalization 
of the intersectoral coordination structure has seen the 
production of a country profile document on the status of 

16 
PARTIE I: Cross-cutting themes STRATEGY 
CBTs in CAR, as well as the revitalization of the Cash Working 
Group (CWG), which meets monthly with the participation 
of 36 international and national organizations. The CWG has 
also developed the first multisectoral minimum expenditure 
basket (MEB) in the country, advocating for the strengthening 
of the market monitoring systems to adapt the MEB to the 
local context before each intervention, taking into account 
the persistent fluctuations in commodity prices according to 
their availability and the non-integration of markets in the 
country. The MEB was also used by each cluster to harmonize 
and budget CBT interventions included in the respective sector 
response plans. Given the limited implementation of CBTs 
in CAR, the growing interest of humanitarian partners and 
operational challenges, the CWG is committed to organizing 
training to raise awareness among actors who wish to address 
monetary interventions and strengthen their programming 
capacities and to generalize the adoption of SOPs for cash 
management. 
Photo: OCHA/Y. Sène

17 
PARTIE I: OPERATIONAL CAPACITY 
OPERATIONAL 
CAPACITY 
Operational capacity remains insufficient to respond to the scale and complexity of 
the crisis. The underfunding of the humanitarian response, insecurity and the weak 
State’s capacity are major obstacles to an effective, rapid and unhindered response. 
Affected people continue to depend on humanitarian assistance 
for their survival and for their access to essential services. This 
dependence on humanitarian aid and on a response mainly led 
by humanitarian actors is exacerbated by the weakness of the 
State. The State’s deployment throughout the country and its 
ability to provide basic services and to implement development 
projects remain limited, despite promises of approximately $2.3 
billion made at the Brussels conference in November 2016. 
With regard to humanitarian funding, as of 20 November 
2018, only 46 per cent of the funding required in the 2018 
HRP has been received, which has resulted in the suspension of 
vital programs and the prioritization of certain activities at the 
expense of assistance that does not meet the standards. 
In order to overcome the challenges of operational response 
capacities, in 2019 the humanitarian community will focus 
on (i) strengthening advocacy for improved humanitarian 
access, particularly in areas of most acute needs; (ii) reinforcing 
coordination and involvement of development and recovery 
partners; (iii) strengthening an integrated and multisectoral 
response; (iv) ensuring capacity building of national partners; 
(v) strengthening emergency response capacities within 
each humanitarian agency; (vi) reinforcing advocacy for an 
enhanced donor funding flexibility; and (vii) strengthening the 
strategic use of the Humanitarian Fund in CAR based on HRP 
needs and priority areas in order to increase the presence of 
humanitarian partners in areas of limited access. 
Currently 139 partners (68 national NGOs, 55 international 
NGOs, 11 United Nations agencies, 3 members of the 
international Red Cross movement, 1 governmental 
institution, 1 regional organization) operate in the country. 
These organizations cover priority areas for humanitarian 
interventions. Although the number of partners in the 
country has undergone minimal variations since 2016, the 
field presence has changed due to increasing needs, the 
multiplication of humanitarian shock zones, access issues 
and operational constraints. In addition, due to targeted 
attacks throughout the year, humanitarian actors have had 
to temporarily withdraw from several locations, depriving 
affected populations of the assistance they need. Furthermore, 
without additional funding, humanitarian partners have been 
forced to reduce some of their activities or even withdraw from 
some areas. 
# OF HUMANITARIAN 
PARTNERS 
139 
CHAD 
DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC 
OF CONGO 
SUDAN 
CONGO 
CAMEROON 
SOUTH 
SUDAN 
Ouaka 
Haute-Kotto 
Ouham 
Mbomou 
Vakaga 
Haut-Mbomou 
Bamingui-Bangoran 
Kémo 
Lobaye 
Ouham 
Pendé 
Ombella M'Poko 
Mambéré-Kadéï 
Nana 
Mambéré 
Nana-Gribizi 
Basse-Kotto 
Sangha-Mbaéré 
Bangui 
64 
19
25 
2 
7 
12 
19 
57 
32 
75 
29 
24
21 
10 
30 
21
20 
Sources: OCHA, Humanitarian partners 
Needs severity 
# of humanitarian organizations 
— +

18 
PARTIE I: HUMANITARIAN ACCESS 
0
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60
January March May June August October 
HUMANITARIAN 
ACCESS 
The security situation continued to deteriorate in many regions in 2018. Logistical 
and administrative constraints have also had a negative impact on access and the 
level of humanitarian response. 
Intervening in the Central African context requires the 
commitment of all actors and parties to the conflict, not only 
for ethical reasons in respect of the principles of humanity, 
neutrality, impartiality and independence, but also for reasons 
of operational efficiency. The strengthening and intensification 
of the humanitarian community’s actions in the field of 
protection and humanitarian access through negotiation and 
humanitarian dialogue initiatives already strengthened in 2018 
will continue in 2019. The adoption of the guidelines on civilmilitary 
coordination (October 2017) clarifies and articulates 
the relationship between humanitarian actors and MINUSCA 
at the strategic and operational level. Their dissemination 
will continue in 2019. A reflection on access and rules of 
engagement with armed groups will continue in 2019. 
Security trends 
Since the beginning of 2018, direct confrontations between 
armed groups have decreased, but this has not resulted in 
improved security for populations or humanitarian actors. 
Tensions and crime levels have even increased in cities 
such as Kaga-Bandoro and Bambari, where humanitarian 
organizations have had to temporarily suspend or reduce their 
activities, sometimes for several weeks. 
The multiplication of factions within existing armed groups, 
the emergence of new groups (as in the west) and the 
persistence of many criminal gangs further complicate the 
situation and make chains of command harder to penetrate. 
It is therefore extremely difficult to set up a movement 
notification system on roads where a multitude of rival groups, 
each control only a few kilometers. 
From 1 January to 31 October 2018, 338 security incidents 
directly affecting humanitarian actors were registered, 70 
per cent of which were robberies, burglaries or intrusions. 
This represents more than one incident per day. While the 
vast majority of these incidents involve random robberies 
and burglaries, they take place in cities or areas where the 
proliferation of armed men creates a permanent climate of 
insecurity. The prefectures of Nana-Gribizi, Ouaka, Haute- 
Kotto and Ouham are particularly concerned. 
MONTHLY SECURITY INCIDENTS AFFECTING 
HUMANITARIAN WORKERS IN 2018 
1.7% 
0.2% 
12.1% 
16.2% 
Interferences, 
constraints 
Intimidations, 
threats, 
assaults 
69.5% 
INCIDENT CATEGORIES 

19 
PARTIE I: HUMANITARIAN ACCESS 
1 
6 
3 
12 
2 
2 
6 
38 
57 
7 
1 
1 
1 
1 
17 
5 
7 
1 
29 
4 
3 
3 
14 
63 
3 
11 
2 
6 
1
3 
23 
1 - 4 
5 - 14 
15 - 24 
25 - 39 
40 - 63 
0 
3 BRIA 
BAMBARI 
Legend 
number of incidents by 
sub-prefecture 
K.BANDORO 
BATANGAFO 
BOUCA 
BANGASSOU 
NDÉLÉ 
KABO 
KOUANGO 
PAOUA 
ALINDAO 
IPPY 
BOSSANGOA 
# OF SECURITY 
INCIDENTS 
338 
Logistic constraints 
The Central African Republic is a vast landlocked country 
with extremely limited and obsolete infrastructure. Only about 
2.5 per cent of the road network is paved. In the majority of 
the country, population movements are made on tracks that 
are sometimes impenetrable for vehicles, particularly during 
the rainy season (May-October). Moreover, these tracks 
deteriorate progressively with each rainy season. 
The crossing of watercourses can be interrupted for several 
weeks or even months due to a defective bridge or a damaged 
barge. In addition, although strengthened through logistics 
platforms, storage capacity remains very limited in some 
regions. Furthermore, many areas of the country are not 
covered by any telecommunications network. 
In order to overcome these constraints, the humanitarian 
community will continue to mobilize the necessary resources to 
strengthen the actions of the members of the Logistics Cluster, 
in particular by strengthening common logistics services, 
including through the deployment of mobile teams and 
logistics resources to respond to emergencies. 
Advocacy efforts are also conducted with local authorities 
and MINUSCA engineers on a regular basis to support the 
maintenance of roads, bridges, ferries and airstrips. The 
multiplication of sensitive areas throughout 2018 reinforces 
the importance of a cross-functional analysis of humanitarian 
logistics deployment capacities in the most likely hot spots of 
2019. In a period of low funding and limited humanitarian 
access, it is indeed crucial that responses to crises are supported 
both by the preventive analysis of local platform capacities and 
by financing of emergency hubs. 
Storage challenges are already major and they are becoming 
more and more complex due to growing insecurity as well as 
the proliferation of burglaries. The responses proposed in this 
framework must fully consider these specific security issues. 
Administrative constraints 
Administrative constraints are mainly related to existing 
regulations, corruption and illegal taxation. The multiplication 
of illegal checkpoints on some roads also hinders activities. 
This type of constraint represents a major obstacle to 
humanitarian access in the Central African Republic and to the 
delivery of aid to the affected populations. The humanitarian 
community must continue to advocate with the relevant 
authorities, at the executive and legislative levels, in order 
to ensure an environment, including a legal framework, that 
is conducive to humanitarian action, as well as in order to 
strengthen the framework for consultation and to reduce the 
number and impact of these constraints. 
In September 2018, the HCT organized a mini-retreat on 
the operational environment. The following actions have 

20 
PARTIE I: HUMANITARIAN ACCESS 
been identified as priorities for improving protection and 
humanitarian access in 2019. 
HUMANITARIAN 
ACCESS MAP 
A QUI PROBLÉMATIQUES RECOMMANDATIONS 
Humanitarian actors .. Humanitarian personnel exposed to a very 
high level of risk. 
.. Challenges in starting projects after the 
temporary suspension of activities following 
security incidents. 
.. Weak capacity of national NGOs. 
.. Raising awareness of humanitarian principles among the parties to the conflict and 
investing in negotiation and acceptance; respect for the “do no harm” operational 
principle. 
.. Continue to train and raise awareness among all staff on the humanitarian principles 
and code of conduct of organizations. 
.. Explore the possibility of sharing humanitarian bases and hubs in high-risk areas and 
strengthen risk mitigation measures, particularly in the most remote areas. 
.. Conduct simulation exercises to test alert mechanisms and emergency plans. 
.. Promote safe training for humanitarian personnel. 
.. Update and adopt contingency/security/evacuation plans and operational procedures 
on emergency communication. 
.. Adopt common positions (where possible) on armed groups in criminal acts/attacks 
against humanitarian workers, especially when they do not take responsibility for them, 
.. and clearly communicate with beneficiaries when temporary withdrawals or 
suspensions of activities are made. 
.. Continue the engagement with MINUSCA to strengthen the security conditions 
conducive to humanitarian action (one of the priorities of its mandate): consideration 
of the needs of humanitarian actors in planning, analysis of the implications for 
humanitarian action in the event of military operations. 
.. Continue the dissemination and sensitization of actors on CMCoord guidelines in the 
field, as well as the sensitization of local authorities CMCoord for Prefects and Sub- 
Prefects 
MINUSCA .. Insufficient common understanding of 
security risks and environmental scans, 
including outdated traffic route risk analyses 
(SRAs). 
.. Lack of knowledge of the Saving Lives 
Together (SLT) framework by some actors. 
Humanitarian aid in CAR 
.. Persistence of conflicts related to the 
transhumance and the exploitation of natural 
resources. 
.. Persistence of ethnic and intra-community 
tensions. 
.. Strengthen passive security measures and alert and response mechanisms in the event 
of incidents. 
.. Develop/strengthen the mapping of areas where humanitarian workers do not have 
access or difficult access and regular common risk analyses at local level. 
.. Continue advocacy on strengthening the judicial system and combating impunity 
(challenges of filing a complaint). 
.. Reinforce work with UNDSS throughout the country, in order to better take into account 
the needs of humanitarian actors and ensure the involvement of humanitarian actors in 
security lessons learned exercises 
.. Widely distribute the Saving Lives Together framework (In French). 
.. Strengthening the engagement and communication capacities of contingents (French).

21 
PARTIE I: HUMANITARIAN ACCESS 
A QUI PROBLÉMATIQUES RECOMMANDATIONS 
Armed actors and 
parties to the conflict 
.. Low acceptance of humanitarian 
interventions and activities by populations, 
parties to conflict and other stakeholders or 
“programmatic and ethical dilemmans.” 
.. Stop attacks on civilians, humanitarian structures and workers and facilitate the 
provision of humanitarian assistance to populations in need. 
.. Take all necessary measures to ensure that prompt and unhindered access is 
allowed to the areas in which they operate and to expose their responsibility and 
accountability in order to prevent any violation of both international human rights law 
and international humanitarian law. 
To the government 
and the international 
community 
.. Delay in the implementation of the peace 
process. 
.. Environment of impunity that may further limit 
access to populations in difficult areas. 
.. Ensure that the implementation of the African Union Roadmap for Peace and Reconstruction 
recognizes the immediate and existing humanitarian needs of the population 
resulting from forced population movements, as well as the protection of civilians. 
.. Include specific provisions on the protection of civilians, humanitarian access and 
durable solutions. 
.. Indiscriminately condemn acts of violence against humanitarian actors. 
Civilian population .. Insufficient commitment to humanitarian 
action. 
.. Continue to support humanitarian action, engage with humanitarian actors to improve 
the quality of the response provided, refrain from acts of sabotage or attacks that 
could have a negative impact on the ability of humanitarian workers to access people 
in need and provide assistance. 
Donors .. Insufficient understanding of the operational 
context by donors (i.e. high response 
costs, resulting from the landlocked nature 
of the country and security and logistical 
challenges). 
.. Lack of flexibility and coordination of funding. 
.. Weak synergies and coordination between 
humanitarian funding and recovery/ 
development. 
.. Prioritize the humanitarian response in CAR and provide flexible funding mechanisms 
that will allow humanitarian organizations to adapt to security and logistical 
challenges, and develop multi-year projects. 
.. Consideration of logistic and security costs. 
Photo: OCHA/Y. Sène

22 
PARTIE I: RESPONSE MONITORING 
RESPONSE 
MONITORING 
The Humanitarian Country Team has established a Response Monitoring 
Framework, which identifies the monitoring of the HRP, defines the timetable, and 
describes the roles and responsibilities of the various humanitarian actors involved in 
its implementation. 
The Response Monitoring Framework provides solid data 
and analysis to guide decision-making in order to strengthen 
the humanitarian response, fill gaps, and adapt the response 
according to the needs and the development in the operational 
context. This framework also aims at reinforcing the 
humanitarian community’s accountability to the affected 
populations and local partners in the Central African Republic. 
Scope of the Response Monitoring Framework 
The Response Monitoring Framework will cover a 12-month 
period (January to December 2019). It includes three levels of 
monitoring for which monitoring and reporting managers are 
identified: 
.. The strategic objectives followed by the HCT and the 
ICC; 
.. The objectives, activities and indicators of the sectoral 
response plans monitored by the cluster coordinators 
and the ICC; 
.. Financial contributions monitored by OCHA’s Financial 
Tracking Service (FTS). 
Reporting 
Based on the results of the evaluations conducted in the 
last quarter of 2018 and the first quarter of 2019, the ICC 
is planning a lighter version of the Humanitarian Needs 
Overview (HNO) in March 2019. The annual HNO will be 
produced in September to guide the planning for 2020. 
Two Progress Monitoring Reports (PMRs) will be produced, 
one in July 2019 for the first semester activities and another 
in January 2020 for activities implemented during 2019. The 
PMRs will present progress towards the achievement of 
the strategic objectives, difficulties in achieving the defined 
targets, developments, financial analyses and recommendations 
for further actions. Each cluster will review the progress 
on its specific objectives, developments, specific difficulties 
encountered and recommendations to address gaps in the 
sectoral response. 
Quarterly humanitarian dashboards will also be produced 
throughout the year. The humanitarian dashboards will 
graphically present information on the humanitarian response, 
needs and gaps of each cluster at the national level. 
The data and information contained in the PMRs and 
humanitarian dashboards will also contribute to the 
development of the humanitarian situation overview and, 
if appropriate, to the revision of the Humanitarian Needs 
Overview and Humanitarian Response Plan in the country. 
HUMANITARIAN PROGRAMME CYCLE TIMELINE 
Dashboard (HD) 
Monitoring Report (PMR) 
Humanitarian Needs Overview (HNO) 
Humanitarian Response Plan (PRH) 
JAN FEB MAR APR MAY JUNE JUL AUG SEP OCT NOV DEC JAN 
2019 2020

23 
PARTIE I: SUMMARY OF NEEDS, TARGETS & REQUIREMENTS 
SUMMARY OF 
NEEDS, TARGETS & 
REQUIREMENTS 
PERSONNES DANS LE BESOIN 
2.9M 
PERSONNES CIBLÉES 
1.7M 
REQUIREMENTS (US$) 
430.7M 
The methodology used to estimate the financial requirements was the “Activity- 
Based Costing”. Each sector estimated the cost of each activity in the prefectures 
characterized by 3 - 5 severity level out of the 0 - 6 severity scale, targeting only 
those in most need of humanitarian assistance on the basis of their vulnerability. 
Humanitarian actors have prioritized, adapted and focused the response around 
those in the most acute need, with realistic targets. 
*Chlidren (<18 years old), adults (18-59 years), Old pers (>59 years) **The total is not the total of the column, since the same people may appear several times 
TOTAL 2.9M** 1.7M** 0.6M** 0.6M** 0.3M** 0.7M 1.2M** - 53% $25M $407M 
DISTRIBUTION OF TARGETED PEOPLE 
2.3M 
2.1M 
1.9M 
1.9M 
1.4M 
1.4M 
1.3M 
1.0M
-
-
- 
0.07M 
1.6M 
0.9M 
1.4M 
1.6M 
0.5M 
0.3M 
0.6M 
0.6M
-
-
- 
0.07M 
- 0.6M 0.3M 0.3M 1.2M - 
- 0.3M 0.1M 0.4M 0.06M - 
- 0.4M 0.2M 0,2M 0.5M - 
0.03M 0.6M 0.3M 0.7M 0.01M - 
- 0.4M 0.05M 0.05M - - 
- 0.1M 0.05M 0.2M - - 
- 0.3M 0.1M 0.2M 0.05M - 
- 0.1M 0.03M 0.5M - - 
- - - - - - 
- - - - - - 
- - - - - - 
6K - 0.07M - - - 
51% 
51% 
51% 
51% 
52% 
51% 
50% 
52% 
-
-
- 
67% 
50 | 46 | 4% 
50 | 46 | 4% 
50 | 46 | 4% 
50 | 35 | 15% 
46 | 49 | 5% 
0 | 95 | 5% 
98 | 2 | 0% 
84 | 16 | 0% 
-
-
- 
33 | 50 | 17% 
2.3M 
22.9M 
39.5M 
28.8M 
35.0M 
166.0M 
22.5M 
12.4M 
40.0M 
26.0M 
21.9M 
1.5M 
13,3M 
51 | 43 | 6% 
Protection 
Health 
WASH1 
Food Sec 
Shelter/NFI/CCCM2 
LCS3 
Education 
Nutrition 
Logistics 
Emerg Telecoms 
Coordination 
Non-sectoral 
response for 
Refugees 
1. Water, Hygiene and Sanitation 
2. Camp Coordination and Camp 
Management 
3. Livelihoods and Community Stabilisation 
Refugees IDPs Returnes/ 
rapatriates 
Host 
communities 
- % 
Female 
% children, Refugees Total 
adults, old. 
persons* 
TOTAL BY STATUS BY SEX & AGE REQUIREMENTS 
Targeted. 
people 
Non 
dispaced 
people 
People in need

24 
PARTIE I: RESPONSE MONITORING 
Photo: OCHA/V. BERO

25 
PARTIE I: RESPONSE MONITORING 
PART II: OPERATIONAL 
RESPONSE PLANS 
CCCM/NFI/Shelter 
Water, Hygiene and Sanitation (WASH) 
Education 
Logistic 
Livelihoods and community stabilization 
Nutrition 
Protection 
Health 
Food security 
Emergency telecommunications 
Coordination 
Refugee Response Plan

26 
PARTIE II: CCCM/NFI/SHELTER 
PEOPLE IN NEED CCCM/NFI/SHELTER 
1.4M 
REQUIREMENTS (US$) 
22.5M 
TARGETED PEOPLE 
500K 
# OF PARTNERS 
35 
Background and needs assessment 
Despite a calm situation in some parts of the 
country, particularly in the west, the security 
situation has gradually deteriorated in many 
prefectures, such as Haute Kotto, Basse Kotto, 
Mbomou, Haut Mbomou and Ouaka. Armed 
groups continue to confront each other, 
which led to a massive displacement of the 
population, who take refuge in sites or with 
host families to protect themselves. Women, 
children and the elderly are the most affected 
because the family and community protection 
they receive is deteriorated due to multiple 
displacements. 
While the number of sites decreased from 83 
to 77 between September 2017 and September 
2018, the population at the sites increased 
from 209,258 to 238,996, representing a 14 
per cent increase. The figures for displaced 
people living with host families have not 
changed significantly due to a limited 
number of returns. As of 30 September 2018, 
approximately 403,000 people were reportedly 
still displaced in host families. In this context, 
the emergency needs of the newly displaced 
persons or the chronic needs of the former 
displaced ones make them increasingly 
vulnerable to diseases and infection risks. 
The needs assessment showed that the needs 
remain high particularly in the areas of Bria, 
Bambari, Ippy, Alindao, Mobaye, Bangassou, 
Mingala, Zangba and Obo. There is also the 
precariousness of returnees who sometimes 
resettle without access to shelter and essential 
non-food items. 
Cluster Strategy 
The cluster’s interventions will aim to 
provide an emergency response to the 
affected populations through the distribution 
of essential household items (NFIs) and 
emergency shelters. Assistance to the affected 
population in sites and host families will be 
provided through the Camp Coordination 
and Camp Management (CCM) and the 
Rapid Response Mechanism (RRM) tools and 
mechanisms. For 2019, the cluster is targeting 
500,000 people, mainly internally displaced 
but also host communities, returnees and 
repatriated. 
Site coordination and management will 
strengthen the protection of all population 
groups living in the sites and ensure their 
access to basic social services. In addition to 
profiling IDPs, site managers will monitor 
the services provided and their quality and 
address identified gaps in order to improve 
the living conditions of affected populations. 
Outside the sites, the profiling of displaced 
persons and the monitoring of population 
movements, in particular through the 
Displacement Tracking Matrix (DTM), should 
be strengthened. Given the volatility of the 
situation in many prefectures due to the 
continuing deteriorating security situation 
and the reduction in humanitarian access, the 
establishment of mobile teams to carry out 
CCCM activities should be considered. 
Interventions relating to essential household 
items and emergency shelters, in kind or in 
cash, help to improve the living conditions 
of the affected populations. In view of the 
economic constraints, the establishment 
of NFI stocks and emergency contingency 
shelters is essential. The contingency and 
flexibility of the intervention modalities 
offered, in particular by the Rapid Response 
Mechanism (RRM), are strongly encouraged 
in order to continue to respond quickly and 
effectively to the various crises. 
Linkage with other sectors: Any needs 
identified during an assessment, distribution 
or site management will be referred to the 
relevant cluster so that a sectoral assessment 
can be carried out and a response provided, if 
necessary. Cases of protection incidents will 
be referred to protection actors for referral 
and gaps identified in responses, in terms of 
WASH, Education and Health will be reported 
to the relevant actors and clusters. 
Cash modalities: Concerning NFIs and 
emergency shelters, after assessing the 
protection risks, needs and feasibility of the 
cash modality, activities based on monetary 
intervention will be encouraged, either 
through cash distribution or vouchers (e.g. 
NFI fairs). This approach strengthens the 
autonomy and dignity of affected people 
through the freedom of choice of beneficiaries, 
revitalizes local markets and creates new 
economic opportunities for beneficiaries. 
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVE 1 
1 Ensure that the affected 
and vulnerable people have 
access to basic non-food 
items while promoting selfsufficiency 
and existing coping 
strategies 
SUPPORT FOR SO1 
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVE 2 
2 Provide the affected 
population with shelter 
to protect them from the 
elements and contribute to their 
safety, dignity and well-being 
SUPPORT FOR SO1 , SO3 
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVE 3 : 
3 Ensure protection 
and assistance to the 
affected population in 
the sites and in host families 
through the appropriate 
CCCM mechanisms and tools 
SUPPORT FOR SO1 , SO2

27 
PARTIE II: CCCM/NFI/SHELTER 
- 0.6M 0.2M 0.3M 0.3M 
- 0.4M 50K 50K - 
51% 
52% 
50| 46 | 4% 
46 | 49 | 5% 
People in NEED 
TARGETED PEOPLE 
REQUIRED FUNDS 
Refugees 
Non Displaced 
People 
IDPs Returnees/ 
Rapatriates 
Host 
Communities 
% female % children, 
adults, elderly 
people* 
BY STATUS BY GENDER & AGE 
*Children (<18 years), adults (18-59 
$22.5M years), Elderly people (>59 years) 
BREAKDOWN OF PEOPLE IN NEED AND TARGETED BY STATUS, SEX AND AGE 
Cross-cutting Protection: Data will be collected and analyzed in a disaggregated manner by age 
and gender and taking into account people with special needs. Women and men are consulted 
separately in order to identify their needs as effectively as possible. Grievance management 
mechanisms are also in place to ensure that the response is adjusted to best meet the needs of 
affected populations. Pre- and post-distribution evaluations will be carried out to ensure the 
quality of the intervention and respect for humanitarian principles. 
Accountability: Consultations and information of beneficiaries and communities are carried out 
in all phases of activity development. The actors sensitize and consult with populations as well 
as local authorities, community and religious leaders, representatives of displaced persons and 
communities. Post-distribution evaluations and complaint mechanisms should be put in place to 
ensure that the project has met the needs of beneficiaries. 
Link with other development actors: With regard to the CCCM, site managers will be 
equipped to carry out activities that will allow their gradual exit. The consolidation of site 
empowerment or even local integration will be considered in areas where there is a certain lull, 
in collaboration with the government and the durable solutions actors. 
Coordination 
The cluster will strengthen coordination and information exchange between national and 
regional levels. It will build the capacities of actors and the data collection tools available, in 
order to make shared information more reliable and relevant. Information sharing will also be 
strengthened to ensure better coordination and a faster and more relevant emergency response. 
CONTACT 
Coordinator of the 
cluster: 
Kenneth Chulley, 
chulley@unhcr.org 
Coordinator of the 
cluster: 
Julie La Roche, 
jlaroche@iom.int 

28 
PARTIE II: water , HYGIeNE and sanitation 
PEOPLE IN NEED WATER, HYGIENE AND SANITATION 
1.9M 
REQUIREMENTS (US$) 
35M 
TARGETED PEOPLE 
1.36M 
# OF PARTNERS 
20 
Background and needs assessment 
Deteriorating living conditions and prolonged 
exposure to disease determinants have 
increased people’s vulnerability to the most 
common diseases (malaria, diarrhea). Indeed, 
many cases of fecal-oral diseases and deaths 
have been reported in the prefectures of 
Ouham Pende and Basse Kotto. In addition, 
the conditions of access to drinking water 
for the 429,000 IDPs living on the country’s 
75 sites are precarious and below standards. 
1.36 million people (666,400 men and 
693,600 women) need assistance to cover 
their minimum safe water needs for drinking, 
personal hygiene and household tasks1 . 
Prioritization criteria 
The Cluster response is based on the analysis 
of the degree of severity and will focus on 
the following population categories: (a) 
newly displaced populations in sites, foster 
families, bush (b) long-term displaced 
populations in sites or foster families, (c) all 
host populations/communities hosting IDPs 
(d) returned populations (e) persons exposed 
to epidemic shocks (e.g. cholera, Ebola virus 
disease or hepatitis E) and/or natural disasters 
(e.g. floods), (f) communities that are in 
transhumance areas (g) other vulnerable 
persons (i.e. suffering from malnutrition, 
and in areas where public institutions and 
institutions provide poor quality WASH 
services). WASH interventions are guided by 
the WASH Cluster “Method for prioritizing 
areas and calculating people in need.” 
Cluster strategy 
The cluster will guide its responses through 
the following actions: 
Improving access to WASH services: 
On IDP sites where the WASH standards 
as defined by the Operational Strategic 
Framework (OSF) are not met, actions will 
consist of: : 
1. Basic water needs to ensure survival from 7.5 to 15 
liters/person/day according to SPHERE standards and 
national standards. 
.. The provision or maintenance of 
WASH services; 
.. The construction of semi-permanent 
infrastructure on long-term sites, 
taking into account safety in the area; 
.. The provision or maintenance of 
WASH services in public institutions 
(schools, markets, FOSA, health 
facilities and malnutrition centers). 
In host communities or areas of return 
where the WASH standards as defined by the 
Operational Strategic Framework are not met, 
actions will consist of: 
.. The construction and/or rehabilitation 
of water access infrastructure 
accompanied by the training of smallscale 
repairers and the rehabilitation of 
management structures (CGPE); 
.. Supporting the community in the 
process of self-building/rehabilitation 
of sanitary infrastructure (management 
of excreta, liquid and solid waste, 
and drainage) using participatory 
approaches to ensure community 
ownership of the works; 
.. Community mobilization and hygiene 
promotion 
.. The provision or maintenance of 
WASH services in public institutions 
(schools, markets, health facilities 
and malnutrition centers) in order 
to take into account the Wash In 
Nut approach, which is essential for 
effective integration between these two 
sectors to combat malnutrition. 
Reinforcement of synergy RRM/ Cluster/ 
DRH/ ANEA: : 
Actions will consist in consolidating and 
strengthening the WASH activities carried 
out by the RRM in areas where the WASH 
situation is extremely critical according to the 
results and recommendations of multisectoral 
needs assessments (MSAs). Emphasis will 
be placed on greater involvement of WASH 
partners, HRDs and ANEA branches to 
ensure the sustainability of the works. 
Strengthening of the operational 
and technical capacities of actors and 
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVE 1 
1Provide emergency WASH 
assistance according to 
cluster standards to affected 
populations following a shock 
SUPPORT FOR SO1 SO2 
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVE 2 : 
2 Ensure secure access to 
WASH services according to 
cluster standards (quality) 
while respecting the minimum 5 
cluster commitments 
SUPPORT FOR SO1 , SO3 
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVE 3 : 
3Restore secure access to 
WASH services for basic 
social services in the most 
vulnerable areas . 
SUPPORT FOR SO1 , SO2

29 
PARTIE II: water , HYGIeNE and sanitation 
decentralization 
.. i. Capacity building of implementing partners (national and international NGOs) in a 
decentralized way in the preparation and response to new emergencies (implementation 
of an emergency preparedness plan). 
.. ii. Capacity building of the DGH , ANEA and SODECA in relation to pillar II of the 
RCPCA to support in a safe and dignified manner the resilience of populations to shocks, 
through the activities approved in the strategic operational framework (SOF) of the 
WASH Cluster. 
Effective integration of cross-cutting themes, in particular the centrality of protection: 
.. One of the cluster’s priorities is to take into account the cluster’s minimum commitments 
for the safety and dignity of girls, boys, men and women (as described in the WASH 
cluster’s strategic operational framework) throughout the project cycle. The cluster, in 
consultation with the implementing partners, will set up a framework for monitoring the 
application of this modality. 
.. With a view to gender mainstreaming and protection, the cluster partners will 
systematize the consultation of the different groups (women, men, people with 
disabilities, etc.) during the different implementation phases. The cluster will ensure that 
implementing partners collect data disaggregated by age and gender for an improved 
analysis. 
.. The WASH cluster will collaborate with the Protection cluster and its sub-clusters 
to develop and disseminate to partners, accountability mechanisms and tools for 
implementation, monitoring and evaluation and accountability to beneficiaries. 
.. In order to respond adequately to the needs of the affected populations, the cluster will 
develop mechanisms for the implementation of CASH as a response modality if market 
conditions allow it (market analysis). 
Link with other sectors: 
At the programmatic and operational levels, synergies will be established with sectors 
complementary to the WASH sector such as Nutrition, Health, CCCM/ NFI/shelter.... Multisectoral 
responses in line with SOF requirements will be addressed: 
.. Nutrition Health WASH: Regular and effective communication will enable joint analyses 
to be carried out in order to provide appropriate responses in accordance with the 
requirements of the WASH in Nut strategy of the strategic operational framework; 
.. CCCM NFI SHELTER and WASH: Regular and effective communication will be 
established to take into account the sectoral needs of IDPs at the sites through the sharing 
of DTM data and to address quality responses. In addition, this sectoral synergy will 
strengthen the ownership of the works by displaced populations. Taking into account the 
sanitation aspect during the construction or rehabilitation of shelters remains a priority 
for the WASH cluster. To this end, the WASH and CCCM and NFI and Shelter clusters 
will set up a framework for the implementation of this recommendation. 
.. EDUCATION and WASH: In collaboration with the Education cluster, the WASH 
cluster will facilitate interventions in schools by providing a WASH activity package. 
.. Responding to outbreaks and health system recovery: The WASH cluster, in 
collaboration with the Health cluster, will actively participate in the development and 
implementation of epidemic response plans. In addition to infrastructure actions to 
ensure access to WASH services in priority health training (FOSA), the cluster actions 
will also focus on knowledge building for infection prevention and control. 
CONTACT 
BA, Amadou 
washcluster.rca@gmail. 
com 
BERBON, William 
wberbon@unicef.org

30 
PARTIE II: water , HYGIeNE and sanitation 
- 0.4M 0.2M 0.2M 1.1M 
- 0.5M 0.2M 0.2M 0.5M 
51% 
51% 
50| 46 | 4% 
50 | 46 | 4% 
Refugees 
Non Displaced 
People 
IDPs Returnees/ 
Rapatriates 
Host 
Communities 
People in NEED 
TARGETED PEOPLE 
REQUIRED FUNDS 
BY STATUS BY SEX & AGE 
% female % children, 
adults, elderly 
people* 
*Children (<18 years), adults (18-59 
$35M years), Elderly people (>59 years) 
BREAKDOWN OF PEOPLE IN NEED AND TARGETED BY STATUS, SEX AND AGE 
Cluster coordination 
Since 2016, HRMD has been actively involved in the coordination of WASH activities, which 
has led to the implementation of an annual transition plan that is renewable each year. One 
of the cluster's priorities for 2019 will be to build the capacity of the HRMD and continue the 
implementation of the plan. In order to ensure a better response, the cluster will support the 
decentralization of coordination in remote areas and promote the involvement of HRMD in 
the implementation, monitoring and evaluation of WASH projects. Finally, the coordination 
mechanism will be strengthened through the funding of the position of co-facilitator from 
humanitarian funds and this will significantly contribute to the achievement of the cluster's 
objectives. 
The WASH cluster will continue its commitment to advocate with the Humanitarian Country 
Team at the request of partners on unmet needs, mobilization of financial resources or other 
humanitarian issues that require particular attention. 
Finally, the WASH cluster, as part of the emergency-development transition, will ensure that 
issues of autonomous and sustainable management of WASH works are taken into account 
by the implementing partners. A census of development actors should also be conducted, 
particularly in areas of return and pacified areas.

31 
PARTIE II: EDUCATION 
PEOPLE IN NEED EDUCATION 
1.4M 
REQUIREMENTS (US$) 
22.5M 
TARGETED PEOPLE 
500K 
# OF PARTNERS 
35 
Background and needs analysis 
The Central African education system, which 
has been weakened for decades, continues to 
suffer from the consequences of the politicalmilitary 
crisis that has been ongoing since 
2013. The resurgence of conflicts and the 
multiplication of pockets of violence directly 
affect almost all prefectures, resulting in 
the destruction and/or loss of school and 
teaching materials, the destruction and/or 
deterioration of school infrastructure. This 
limits the access of children and adolescents 
(aged 3 to 18) to educational and personal 
development opportunities. Problems of 
access and quality of education, coupled with 
the precarious socio-economic situation and 
frequent population displacements, are the 
main cause of school drop-out at the primary 
level (drop-out rate of 51 per cent) and low 
completion rates at the Basic 2 and general 
secondary level (11 per cent and 6 per cent - 
with very low average participation of girls, 
almost 3 per cent), while children aged 13-18 
represent about 20 per cent of the country's 
total population. 
The insecurity situation has aggravated gender 
inequality in access to education and the 
vulnerability of girls to sexual exploitation and 
abuse. Central African children affected by the 
crisis are at high risk of abuse and exploitation: 
recruitment into armed groups, crime, sexual 
exploitation and abuse, early marriage, early 
pregnancy. 
Security instability is the first obstacle to 
access to education: at least 30 per cent of 
schools are still closed throughout the country. 
The Humanitarian Needs Analysis (HNO) for 
Education revealed that approximately 1.3 
million children and adolescents (aged 3 to 18 
years), or 28 per cent of the total population, 
are in need of emergency education assistance, 
including 820,000 in acute need. Nearly 
290,000 pre-school, primary and secondary 
school-age children are displaced, including 
about 170,000 who are dropping out of school. 
The national education system in Basic I 
is composed of more than 60 per centof 
schoolmaster parents, who are poorly 
trained and come directly from the affected 
communities. As a result, the quality of the 
education provided is low. In crisis areas, 
where there are only a few functional and/ 
or made functional schools, the average 
pupil/teacher ratio is 1/100 while the pupil/ 
classroom ratio is 1/120. 
Between January and October 2018, 28 alerts 
reporting attacks on schools were received 
by the Education cluster, bringing the total 
number of reported attacks on the education 
system since January 2017 to 89. These attacks 
were also directed against teaching staff and 
actors involved in emergency education. 
Although the 2018-2019 school year officially 
opened on 17 September 2018 (nearly 
1,297,000 children are expected at primary 
level), the resumption of classes remains timid 
in the areas affected by the crisis; this requires 
a special awareness and a regular monitoring. 
Prioritization criteria 
The vulnerability analysis was defined 
according to five criteria: (i) the percentage of 
non-functional schools following the crisis; 
(ii) the percentage of displaced children not 
attending school; (iii) the pupil/teacher ratio 
in crisis-affected areas; (iv) the percentage of 
schoolmaster-parents in crisis-affected areas; 
and (v) the percentage of reported incidents 
(MRM) against schools in crisis-affected areas. 
The geographical selection criteria will be 
based on the evolution of the security context, 
the situation of population displacements and 
the monitoring of gaps reported by partners. 
The cluster will target in priority: (a) newly 
displaced and long-term displaced children 
(3-18 years old) in host sites and families, (b) 
schools hosting IDP children (newly displaced 
or long-term), returnees and repatriates, (c) 
children exposed to epidemic shocks and/or 
natural disasters and (d) children who, in their 
areas, have never had access to educational 
opportunities. Particular emphasis will be 
placed on the inclusion of girls, women 
and other children from minority groups 
(ethnic or religious), unaccompanied and 
separated children who are subject to abuse or 
discrimination. 
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVE 1 : 
1Ensure the survival of girls 
and boys (3-18 years old) 
affected by the crisis through 
equitable access to healthy and 
safe learning environments 
SUPPORT FOR SO1 
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVE 2 : 
2Strengthen the protection of 
out-of-school girls and boys 
(3-18 years old) in crisis 
areas through access to quality 
alternative education adapted to 
needs 
SUPPORT FOR SO1 , SO3 
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVE 3 : 
3Protect the rights of girls and 
boys affected by the crisis 
against immediate and future 
threats, through access to peace 
education and strengthening 
psychosocial adaptation 
SUPPORT FOR SO1 , SO2

32 
PARTIE II: EDUCATION 
Cluster strategy 
The Education cluster will focus its strategy on three priority areas: 
.. Ensure the survival of girls and boys (3-18 years old) affected by the crisis through equitable access to healthy and safe 
learning environments; 
.. Strengthen the protection of out-of-school girls and boys (3-18 years old) in crisis areas through access to quality 
alternative education adapted to needs; 
.. Protect the rights of affected girls and boys in crisis areas from immediate and future threats, through access to peace 
education and strengthening psychosocial adaptation. 
By mutual agreement, cluster members will prioritize urgent and non-chronic interventions and focus on children and youth (girls 
and boys) in areas particularly affected by the conflict, where access to school is limited or non-existent due to insecurity or lack of 
teachers. 
(a) The rights of girls, women and other children belonging to minority groups (ethnic or religious), children living with 
disabilities, and unaccompanied and separated children who are subjected to abuse or discrimination. 
In particular, the cluster will continue to support education in areas of displacement and return to ensure access and quality of 
education in host communities and areas of return to contribute to social cohesion. 
Immediate emergency interventions will focus on children who have dropped out of school following a shock or displacement 
in order to ensure access to and maintenance of quality education through integration, reintegration and/or maintenance in the 
formal system through the appropriate program according to their needs and profiles. Rapid and mobile emergency education 
activities are all the more crucial as the risks of permanent drop-out are higher as the period of interruption of schooling has been 
long. 
Particular emphasis will be placed on securing both physical and structural schools. Awareness-raising among communities and 
authorities on school safety will be strengthened and mechanisms for reporting cases of abuse will be systematically put in place. 
The Cluster will further strengthen its work with protection actors on the MRM to secure school infrastructure 
Regarding schoolmaster parents, the Cluster aligns itself with the government's position to deploy qualified teachers in all schools 
in the country. Thus, for the Cluster, recourse to schoolmaster parents must be made as a last resort, but advocacy must be pushed 
to the competent authorities for the effective deployment of teachers. 
Linkage with other sectors: : 
In its strategy, the Education cluster will work in synergy with other clusters and taskforces to harmonize priority areas and ensure 
a holistic/integrated response for the most vulnerable: 
Shelter/NFI/CCCM Cluster: The Education cluster will monitor with great interest the results/analyses of IOM's assessments of 
the situation in IDP sites (DTM) and ensure that education-specific data are also collected and inform the response. 
Water, Hygiene and Sanitation Cluster: The cluster is committed to actively participating in the "WASH in Schools" thematic 
group in order to harmonize itself on the axes and schools targeted/prioritized by the two sectors (WASH and Education) and to 
ensure compliance with the INEE and Sphere standards. 
Protection Cluster: The Education cluster will closely monitor the situation of population movements with the Commission on 
Population Movement (CMP), in particular the movements of school-age children. In synergy with Child Protection, the cluster 
will ensure that a referral system is set up in all supported school structures, that teachers are trained in psychosocial support, that 
the system for monitoring and documenting attacks on the education system is in place and operational, and that the issue of birth 
registration is addressed in order to provide each child with a birth registration certificate. 
Food Security/Nutrition Cluster: School feeding (school canteen) remains an important aspect of the response in several areas of 
CAR. In particular, 162,000 children are targeted for school canteen activities in highly vulnerable areas. A permanent link will be 
established with the Food Security cluster to ensure coordination in the support to be provided to parents' associations (PTAs) in 
order to ensure the care of schoolmaster parents (market garden projects, etc.). 
Rapid Response Mechanism (RRM): Thanks to the MSAs carried out by the RRM, the cluster will monitor the educational 
situation in areas that are difficult for education partners to access. 
Cash terms and conditions: The cluster encourages the use of cash modalities in different activities to address challenges such as 
transport, access to banking structures and insecurity. Cash could be given to parents' associations to cover some of the running 
and maintenance costs of schools. 
Cross-cutting protection: The Education cluster strategy includes, in a broad sense, the approach and mechanisms by which actors 

33 
PARTIE II: EDUCATION 
CONTACT 
Coordonnateur du 
cluster : 
Passy AMANI 
BWAMI, 
educationcluster.rca@ 
gmail.com 
seek to realize children's right to be free from abuse and exploitation and to ensure that girls 
and boys have a positive experience of all programs implemented. It includes the commitment 
of actors to prevent child abuse by their staff, partners and contractors through the signing of 
a code of conduct, and to respond to cases that may arise through risk reduction policies and 
procedures for children. 
Accountability: The cluster will ensure the effectiveness of all feedback mechanisms that will 
guarantee beneficiaries access to information on aid, involvement in decision-making and a 
complaint management mechanism. Compliance with the code of conduct by Education actors 
will be a priority for the cluster so that assistance does not expose beneficiaries and is based solely 
on vulnerability. 
Link with other development actors: The Education cluster will ensure active participation in 
all meetings convened by the leaders of the Local Education Partners Group (GLPE) and Pillar 2 
of RCPCA. It will also share information on the status of the emergency response, key gaps and 
challenges and sectoral trends to be monitored in order to better align with recovery actors. 
The cluster coordination team will use this space to convey strong advocacy messages on sectoral 
issues, in particular the consideration of education as an emergency program. 
Coordination 
In support of the Ministry of National Education, the cluster will be coordinated by the 
lead agency (UNICEF) and a co-facilitating NGO. One of the significant advances in cluster 
coordination is the formalization and involvement of the government contribution with the 
establishment of an emergency unit within the Ministry of Education. It is necessary and a 
priority to strengthen the capacities of this cell in order to ensure effective coordination and a 
predictable response to the standards defined by the cluster. 
With 4 operational sub-clusters (Bouar, Bossangoa, Kaga Bandoro and Bambari), the actors 
present and appointed by the cluster's Strategic Orientation Committee (SOC) undertake to 
strengthen this coordination at the local level through education taskforces that will operate in 
close collaboration with decentralized government structures (AI, Sector,...) while ensuring a 
transfer of skills. 
- 0.3M 0.1M 0.7M 0.1M 
- 0.3M 0.1M 0.2M - 
50% 
50% 
98| 2 | 0% 
98 | 2 | 0% 
People in NEED 
TARGETED PEOPLE 
REQUIRED FUNDS 
Refugees 
Non Displaced 
People 
IDPs Returnees/ 
Rapatriates 
Host 
Communities 
% female % children, 
adults, Elderly 
people* 
*Children (<18 years), adults (18-59 
years), Elderly people (>59 years) 
BY STATUS BY SEX & AGE 
$40M 
BREAKDOWN OF PEOPLE IN NEED AND TARGETED BY STATUS, SEX AND AGE

34 
PARTIE II: LOGISTICS 
PEOPLE IN NEED LOGISTICS 
Support to the 
humanitarian 
community 
REQUIREMENTS (US$) 
21.9M 
TARGETED PEOPLE 
Support to the 
humanitarian 
community 
# OF PARTNERS 
5 
Context and needs analysis 
The situation in the Central African Republic 
is characterized by extreme volatility and 
an increase in armed conflicts in different 
parts of the country. The increase in 
violence, combined with the lack of adequate 
infrastructure, exponentially increases the 
logistical challenges faced by the humanitarian 
community as a whole. 
To promote physical access, logistical 
capacities need to be strengthened at the 
country level through the establishment of 
common air, road and warehousing services 
and platforms. Actually, and in order to 
ensure, above all, immediate access to the 
most affected populations despite security 
constraints, the issue is about guaranteeing 
an air transport service, for both passengers 
and cargo. This includes the rehabilitation of 
airstrips, pre-aircraft facilitation to optimize 
cargos, and the financing of maintenance 
committees for renovated tracks, in order to 
ensure access all along the year for landlocked 
localities. 
In addition, the sustainability of physical access 
also requires the achievement of rehabilitation 
works of existing infrastructures: roads (roads 
as well as sloughs), runways, ferries, bridges, 
buildings for storage), allowing movements' 
viability on the country's main roads. A rapid 
deployment capacity helping to maintain 
humanitarian access is here crucial. 
Prioritization criteria 
The Logistics cluster will ensure that transport 
requests from humanitarian organizations are 
compliant with the priorities defined by the 
humanitarian community. An air cargo service 
steering committee was revived in the last 
quarter of 2018, and will continue in 2019, in 
order to prioritize the needs of partners and 
ensure the use of air transport as a last resort. 
Cluster strategy 
In 2019, the Logistics cluster will continue 
to support the humanitarian community by 
facilitating, coordinating and ensuring access 
to common logistics services. 
In order to support the emergency operations 
of organizations operating in areas affected by 
humanitarian shocks, the Logistics cluster will 
continue to provide an air response capability. 
Air transport of passengers and light cargo by 
UNHAS will remain a key activity in 2019. Its 
role is critical to maintaining humanitarian 
actors' access to 24 regular destinations and 
eight ad hoc ones in the country under good 
financial and security conditions. 
To complement the passenger and light 
cargo flights facilitated by UNHAS, the 
Logistics cluster will continue its facilitation 
work of emergency air cargo service (ad hoc 
flights) for destinations difficult to access by 
road, and sectors of activity prioritized by 
the Intercluster Committee (ICC) and the 
Humanitarian Country Team (HCT). This 
service will allow transporting more than 300 
MT of humanitarian inputs and supporting 
emergency operations in priority areas 
through the Rapid Response Mechanism. The 
support of the logistics cluster will also help to 
continue the renovation of runways, making it 
possible to maintain the 29 destinations served 
throughout 2019. 
The Logistics cluster will continue to provide 
common logistics services. A common 
warehouse, including a temperaturecontrolled 
storage area, and a reconditioning 
service is already operational in Bangui. 
Several mobile storage units are in place in 
Bambari, Bossangoa and Kaga Bandoro; others 
are planned in Alindao and Zemio. During 
2019, a storage space dedicated to health and 
nutrition actors will be opened in Bangui. 
Common road transport services are provided 
from Bangui, Bambari and Bossangoa to all 
prefectures in the country. In acute crises, a 
free road transport financing opportunity may 
be considered if the cluster's actors consider it 
necessary. 
Finally, the Logistics cluster will continue to 
support the rehabilitation works of crossing 
structures (bridges, barges and roads) in 
order to provide access for humanitarian 
actors, and seek synergies with other projects 
related to rehabilitation. Indeed, as the needs 
are enormous, they completely isolate a 
large number of people, depriving them of 
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVE 1 : 
1Improve the logistics 
operations of the 
humanitarian community 
through common services in the 
main areas of the country. 
SUPPORT FOR SO1 
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVE 2 : 
2Strengthen air transport of 
passenger and air cargo for 
the humanitarian community 
in the main areas of the country. 
SUPPORT FOR SO1 
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVE 3 : 
3Strengthen air transport of 
passenger and air cargo for 
the humanitarian community 
in the main areas of the country. 
SUPPORT FOR SO1

35 
PARTIE II: LOGISTICS 
CONTACT 
Cluster Coordinator 
Hildebrand, Katja 
(katja.hildebrand@wfp. 
org) 
Cluster Coordinator 
Première Urgence 
Internationale (PUI) ; 
UNHAS Manager: 
Moussard, Eric 
(eric.moussard@wfp.org) 
humanitarian aid. Restoring physical access to landlocked areas is essential to facilitate movement 
on the country's roads. The cluster will operate through the Mobile Intervention Brigade 
(MIB), a rapid and flexible emergency response mechanism that restores humanitarian access by 
addressing critical points. The alerts brought up by the cluster partners will make it possible, in 
agreement with the humanitarian community operating in the targeted area, to validate the list 
of MIB's priority interventions. 
Coordination 
The Logistics cluster is one of the cornerstones of the humanitarian response, making it possible 
to reduce costs and optimize the use of resources through the massification and pooling of 
services, to create synergies and avoid duplication of efforts. 
The bi-monthly cluster coordination meetings are organized to maintain an open forum to 
discuss, address humanitarian logistics challenges, promote joint planning and improve logistics 
needs analysis. The co-facilitation of the cluster will be ensured by the Première Urgence 
Internationale NGO. The cluster is an active member of the Intercluster Committee and the 
Civil-Military Coordination Forum, both facilitated by UNOCHA, as well as the RRM Steering 
Committee, managed by UNICEF. 
Information management is also a key element of the Logistics cluster's mandate and a 
fundamental aspect of logistics coordination. Information managers collect, analyze and share 
operational information related to access, infrastructure and logistics services from the field, so it 
is crucial that partners inform the cluster of their progress, alerts on facilities to be rehabilitated 
and those that have been rehabilitated, etc. The humanitarian logistics community mailing list 
and the Logistics cluster website are the main tools for sharing information. https://logcluster. 
org/ops/caf13a

36 
PARTIE II: LIVELIHOODS AND COMMUNITY STABILISATION 
LIVELIHOODS AND COMMUNITY 
STABILISATION 
PEOPLE IN NEED 
1.4M 
REQUIREMENTS (US$) 
12.4M 
TARGETED PEOPLE 
0.3M 
# OF PARTNERS 
25 
Context and needs analysis 
In 2018, the Central African crisis was marked 
by persistent attacks on the population. 
The total number of internally displaced 
people and refugees was estimated at about 
1.2 million in August 2018. In this context 
of security and political fragility, and 
notwithstanding the multisectoral support 
provided by the humanitarian community 
and the government, the number of people in 
need has increased by 400,000 between 2017 
and 2018. The sectoral HNO has identified 
1,405,367 individuals at national level, i.e. 
690,628 men (49 per cent) and 714,739 (51 per 
cent) women. 
In the socio-economic field, actions have been 
undertaken to rehabilitate and strengthen 
the livelihoods of populations affected by 
conflicts, particularly through IGA and LIW. 
However, it must be noted that poverty and 
underemployment characterize communities, 
particularly women and young people whose 
socio-economic reintegration is jeopardized. 
The September 2018 IPC analysis clearly 
indicates that 1.9 million people, or about 40 
per cent of the total population, are acutely 
food insecure and require an immediate 
response. Phases 3 and 4 with more than 
50 per cent are observed in 7 out of 16 
prefectures. These elements weaken the 
low resilience capacity gained through the 
combined efforts of actors. The success 
of strategies to implement populations’ 
livelihood stabilization actions depends on the 
security context in the country. 
Prioritization criteria 
The scope of the Livelihoods and Community 
Stabilization (LCS) cluster covers early 
recovery and livelihood stabilization actions 
of populations. The prioritization approach, 
which is part of the integration perspective, 
is based on the need to develop appropriate 
solutions that can lead to the empowerment or 
even resilience of grassroots communities. 
This response focuses on populations with 
acute unmet needs. The cluster mainly 
targets areas with high potential for return 
of displaced persons and areas of shocks as 
mentioned in the overview of the sector’s 
humanitarian needs. Out of the 1.4M people 
in need in 2019, 23 per cent are targeted 
as part of the humanitarian response. This 
proportion mainly represents the populations 
of areas in phase 3 and 4 of the sector severity 
map. Unmet needs through the HRP will be 
addressed through other funding mechanisms 
and with development actors. 
Cluster strategy 
The strategy aims to promote the human wellbeing 
and social capital of populations through 
the creation and strengthening of resilience 
activities as entry points for recovery and 
development activities. Humanitarian needs 
in the Central African Republic are various 
and complex, the sector has developed three 
interrelated objectives, which will contribute 
to two of the strategic objectives of the 2017- 
2019 humanitarian response plan: 
The first objective aims to stabilize 
immediate livelihoods and revitalize affected 
and at-risk communities by focusing on 
cash-based interventions for the creation/ 
rehabilitation of community assets that allow 
both the rapid injection of cash into the 
local economy and the implementation of 
activities that benefit entire communities as 
well as income generating activities (IGAs) in 
emergencies. The rehabilitation of community 
infrastructures such as health centers, schools, 
local markets, food storage facilities and places 
where goods and services are exchanged 
through LIW interventions using local labor 
and materials could facilitate the resumption 
of socio-economic activities and community 
stabilization. The encouragement of grouping 
for the production, processing and marketing 
of products will be supported by training and 
provision of installation or start-up kits for 
the conduct of income-generating activities. 
Marketing channels for these products will 
be established in order to increase the profits 
from the activity with a view to rapidly 
restoring the local economy and therefore that 
of beneficiaries. 
CASH modalities: For LIW activities, 
conditional cash will be used (cash for work). 
The most appropriate modality (coupons, 
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVE 1 : 
1Support the reconstruction of 
livelihoods for affected and 
at-risk populations 
SUPPORT FOR SO3 
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVE 2 : 
2Strengthen the empowerment 
of affected and at-risk 
populations 
SUPPORT FOR SO3 
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVE 3 : 
3Support coordination and 
promote living together 
and community conflict 
management 
SUPPORT FOR SO2

37 
PARTIE II: LIVELIHOODS AND COMMUNITY STABILISATION 
direct or mixed cash) will be used depending on the situation in the intervention area and 
the evaluation of the most appropriate cash modality. With regard to the implementation of 
income-generating activities, the partners will be responsible for the acquisition, as required, of 
equipment depending on the socio-economic activity of beneficiaries. 
The second objective aims to empower affected and at-risk populations through vocational 
training on themes that can lead to youth entrepreneurship and self-employment. In addition 
to training, beneficiaries of humanitarian aid will be called upon to gather in Village Savings 
and Loan Associations (VSLA) or "KELEMBA", to ensure the sustainability of humanitarian 
response achievements and to consider reducing the dependence of the affected and at-risk 
population on humanitarian aid and therefore to make them resilient. 
The third objective is cross-cutting to the first two objectives. It aims to support beneficiaries 
in the implementation of projects related to objectives 1 and 2 to communicate around social 
cohesion and to break down possible barriers that may exist between individuals and between 
communities. These activities will contribute to reducing inter-community clashes and 
the fact that certain minorities such as Peulh herders, the elderly and women are the main 
victims of violence. Respect for human rights, the protection of women and the acceptance of 
minorities will be highlighted. During the activities, information and awareness-raising for the 
prevention or resolution of disputes through non-violent means, but also actions for community 
violence reduction (CVR) involving young people and vulnerable people as a priority will be 
implemented. At all levels of intervention, gender and age aspects will be taken into account in 
accordance with the IASC standard for the sector updated in March 2018. Of course, as far as age 
is concerned, these are people aged 18 and over. 
Accountability: in order to ensure accountability both to donors and to people in need of 
assistance, an implementation monitoring framework of activities and communication with 
donors will be set up within the cluster. The 4040 green line will be used to report any protection 
incidents and to receive appropriate information and/or assistance in addition to the suggestion 
boxes that should be available. The handling of complaints and suggestions will be subject of 
a report to be prepared on a quarterly basis and presented during implementation monitoring 
meetings. At all levels, community participation will be essential to identify needs, define 
priorities and intervention modalities, target beneficiaries and evaluate the quality of projects in 
achieving objectives. Implementing partners are therefore required to respect the principles of 
accountability to the affected persons. 
Linkage with other sectors: coordination will be established at two levels. First level with the 
other clusters, mainly the health, food security, water, hygiene and sanitation, education and 
shelter/non-food items cluster, in order to provide assistance and integrated support to the 
populations. The second level concerns other recovery actors. The cluster will be responsible 
for establishing the emergency/development link. This coordination, which includes the 
government, will facilitate the linkage between the activities implemented through RCPCA 
and other technical and financial partners working on these issues in the country. The World 
Bank, through its recovery programs (Londo, Londo +, PACAD, etc.) within this cluster, will 
contribute through its interventions to take over from humanitarian interventions where 
possible. 
Coordination 
In 2019, the information coordinator and manager, assigned by UNDP, will facilitate 
coordination work beyond the connection with other clusters for action synergies. In order to 
address recovery issues to the humanitarian coordinator and as noted in the UNDP evaluation 
report in 2017, the recruitment of an early recovery adviser is necessary. He will support the 
humanitarian coordinator in the planning, prioritization and strategic coordination of early 
recovery. At regional level, the establishment of the cluster in Bossangoa in addition to the 
already operational Bambari cluster will continue. The other relevant Ministries will also be 
informed and involved in the work of the Cluster. The cluster will be involved in the work of 
the Food Security and Resilience Sectoral Group to monitor the implementation of RCPCA and 
durable solutions in the country. During the implementation of this HRP, the link with UNDP 
CONTACT 
Cluster Coordinator : 
OUATTARA Oumar 
oumar.ouattara@undp. 
org 

38 
PARTIE II: LIVELIHOODS AND COMMUNITY STABILISATION 
and its partnership with the Ministry of Planning will be key to ensure a gradual leadership 
transfer to national authorities. The possible closure of the cluster will depend on the discussions 
that will take place from December 2018 at the IASC meeting. 
- 0.3M 0.2M 0.9M - 
- 0.3M - 0.2M - 
51% 
51% 
0| 95| 5% 
0 | 95 | 5% 
BY STATUS BY SEX & AGE 
People in NEED 
TARGETED PEOPLE 
REQUIRED FUNDS 
Refugees 
Non Displaced 
People 
IDPs Returnees/ 
Rapatriates 
Host 
Communities 
% female % children, 
adults, Elderly 
people* 
*Children (<18 years), adults (18-59 
$12.4M years), Elderly people (>59 years) 
BREAKDOWN OF PEOPLE IN NEED AND TARGETED BY STATUS, SEX AND AGE

39 
PARTIE II: nutrition 
PEOPLE IN NEED NUTRITION 
1.04M 
REQUIREMENTS (US$) 
26M 
TARGETED PEOPLE 
646k 
# OF PARTNERS 
40 
Context and needs analysis 
The sectoral analysis of the nutritional 
situation based on the results of the 
Standardized Monitoring and Assessment of 
Relief and Transitions (SMART) nutritional 
surveys conducted in CAR shows a worrying 
nutritional situation. Indeed, Severe Acute 
Malnutrition (SAM) persists with prevalence 
rates above the WHO emergency threshold 
of 2 per cent in 39 (55 per cent) of the 
country's 71 health sub-prefectures. Eight 
health sub-prefectures (Zangba, Mobaye, 
Kembé, Alindao, Birao, Ouada-Djallé, Gambo 
and Ouango) have a GAM level considered 
"critical", exceeding the 15 per centgency 
threshold defined by WHO. 
In addition, the nutritional situation remains 
very fragile in IDP sites where, according to 
recent SMART surveys, the prevalence rate 
of GAM is higher than the 15% emergency 
threshold defined by WHO in the 5 existing 
IDP sites in the city of Obo (Haut-Mbomou 
Prefecture), 3 out of 4 sites in the city of 
Alindao (Basse-Kotto Prefecture) and 8 
out of 9 sites in the city of Bambari (Ouaka 
Prefecture). 
In consultation with the partners in the 
Nutrition cluster, the estimated needs of the 
Nutrition sector are as follows: 
.. 38,213 children aged 6 - 59 months 
suffering from severe acute 
malnutrition (SAM). 
.. 51,756 children aged 6 - 59 months 
suffering from moderate acute 
malnutrition (MAM). 
.. 55,595 acutely malnourished pregnant 
and lactating women (PW/LW). 
.. 7,950 people living with HIV. 
.. 5,732 accompanying severely 
malnourished acute children with 
medical complications. 
.. 611,154 people in need of preventive 
nutritional assistance (Vit A 
supplementation, deworming, etc.). 
.. 277,976 PW/LW requiring awareness 
and promotion of good infant and 
child feeding practices (IYCF). 
Prioritization criteria 
In 2019, the Nutrition cluster will work in 58 
health sub-prefectures identified as priorities 
out of 71 in CAR. Given the nutritional 
environment in CAR, the criteria used to 
prioritize the health sub-prefectures were: 
the GAM prevalence rate (greater than 
or equal to 10 per cent) and/or the SAM 
prevalence rate (greater than or equal to 1.6 
per cent) associated with aggravating factors 
(epidemics; food insecurity phase 3&4 IPC; 
population movement, retrospective infant 
and child mortality; increase in the number of 
admissions > 30% in nutritional structures for 
3 months). 
The cluster partners will target 646,555 people 
in need of nutritional assistance, including 
71,975 targeted by curative interventions 
(i.e. 11 per cent) and 574,580 targeted by 
preventive interventions (i.e. 89 per cent): 
.. 80 per cent of children with SAM will 
receive adequate treatment, i.e. 30,570 
children under 5 years of age (52 per 
cent girls, 48 per cent boys); 
.. 80 per cent of children with MAM 
will benefit from nutritional care, i.e. 
41,405 children under 5 years of age 
(52 per cent girls, 48 per cent boys) 
.. 100 per cent of care supporters of 
severe acute malnourished children 
with medical complications admitted 
to therapeutic units, i.e. 5,732 people, 
will receive food assistance through the 
CASH modality; 
.. 100 per cent of people living with HIV 
malnourished, or 7,950 people; 
.. More than 71,975 pregnant and 
lactating women will benefit from 
activities to raise awareness and 
promote good practices in the IYCF; 
.. In addition, a covering supplementary 
feeding program will be provided to 
children aged 6-23 months (189,261 
children) in the 58 sub-prefectures 
identified as priorities (80 per cent). 
.. Similarly, at least 488,923 children 
aged 6-59 months will benefit from 
Vitamin A supplementation in the 58 
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVE 1 : 
1Provide equitable access to 
life-saving interventions by 
treating acute malnutrition in 
at least 80% of expected cases 
SUPPORT FOR SO1 
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVE 2 : 
2Prevent deterioration in 
nutritional status in at least 
80% of expected cases 
SUPPORT FOR SO3 
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVE 3 : 
3Improve the care of acute 
malnourished children 
through coordination, 
monitoring and evaluation of 
actions. 
SUPPORT FOR SO3

40 
PARTIE II: nutrition 
sub-prefectures identified as priorities; 
.. More than 435,299 children aged 12-59 months will benefit from deworming in the 58 sub-prefectures identified as 
priorities. 
Cluster strategy 
In 2019, the partners of the Nutrition cluster will intensify their activities in line with the growing capacities of partners and 
funding, and the increasing needs. The cluster's efforts will focus on: 
.. Integrated management of cases of acute malnutrition in the national health system; 
.. Community screening and referral to health facilities of acute malnutrition cases in children aged 6-59 months; 
.. The search for cases of acute malnutrition through (i) active and passive screening campaigns and home visits, particularly 
in areas with low coverage in terms of humanitarian response through mobile health and nutrition clinics, (ii) the recovery 
of children in acute malnutrition following abandonment, and (iii) the reopening of inpatient and outpatient therapeutic 
nutritional units closed as a result of insecurity (or 115 therapeutic nutritional units); 
.. Strengthening the nutritional monitoring and early warning system, and rapid assessments in priority areas. A total of 70 
sentinel sites for nutritional surveillance will be established in 35 health districts. 
.. Coordination for the provision of nutritional inputs to health centers covered by partners involved in the care of acute 
malnutrition cases in priority areas; 
.. Maintaining the contingency stock and the capacity to pre-position inputs and partners to respond to the emergency; 
.. Micronutrient supplementation, deworming of children, and awareness and promotion of IYCF good practices in affected 
areas. 
In addition, new intervention strategies will be explored and introduced to simplify and harmonize the treatment of uncomplicated 
SAM and MAM in children aged 6-59 months and this, in order to improve program coverage, quality of care, ensure the 
continuum of care and reduce the costs of care (Cost-effectiveness). 
In addition, acute malnutrition management units and the capacities of health providers, as well as members of community 
associations and community relays (COREs), will be strengthened on the care and prevention of malnutrition through 
training, supervision and the provision of tools, materials and kits. Cluster partners will be required to pool their resources and 
capacities to enable vulnerable populations to have adequate access to life-saving care. The Community-based Management of 
Acute Malnutrition (CMAM) approach will be prioritized and scaled up in the 58 priority sub-prefectures. The mobile clinic 
intervention strategy will be prioritized and used to meet the needs of affected people living in host communities, displaced 
people's sites or in areas less covered by the response. 
The CASH modality: Such modality will be taken into account in the cluster's response to provide assistance to those 
accompanying severely malnourished children with medical complications admitted to the stabilization centers, i.e. 5,732 people. 
Links with other sectors: The Nutrition cluster will also focus on multisectoral coordination (WASH, Food Security, Health), 
Integration of nutrition into the health system, and strengthening the "Community Based Nutrition" approach to facilitate better 
community ownership of interventions. Thus, the nutritional response will be deployed in complementarity with the responses 
from other sectors such as: 
.. WASH: The "WASH in Nut" approach will be strengthened to ensure good hygiene conditions in care facilities and in 
the community (rehabilitation of WASH infrastructure), and messages on good hygiene and sanitation practices will be 
disseminated among care supporters of AM children in health centers and in the community. 
.. Food Security: The minimum package of Nutrition-Food Security activities will be strengthened through the distribution 
of food assistance in the form of food, support for income-generating activities locally among women's production groups 
and COREs, and the distribution of agricultural input kits (market gardens). 
.. Health: The integration of the nutritional care component into mobile health clinics and the link with the HIV/AIDS case 
management program while patients are admitted to a nutritional program; the development of the capacity of healthcare 
providers at all levels for community-based management of acute malnutrition. 
.. Protection: The integration of nutrition activities, and more particularly of IYCF, into the TSLCP/EEA; better integration 
of the psychosocial component, referrals and GBV awareness into nutrition activities. 
.. Education: Psychological and motor stimulation of children admitted to hospital stabilization centers; deworming, 
awareness-raising of teachers in nutrition and distribution of food rations.

41 
PARTIE II: nutrition 
CONTACT 
Cluster Coordinator : 
Yves Nzigndo, 
ynzigndo@unicef.org; 
Cluster Co-facilitator: 
Arsène B. ELIMU, 
cofacilitateurclusternutrca@
gmail.com 
- 0.3M 40K 0.8M - 
- 0.1M 30K 0.5M - 
51% 
52% 
50| 46| 4% 
84 | 16 | 0% 
BY STATUS BY SEX & AGE 
People in NEED 
TARGETED PEOPLE 
REQUIRED FUNDS 
Refugees 
Non Displaced 
People 
IDPs Returnees/ 
Rapatriates 
Host 
Communities 
% female % children, 
adults, Elderly 
people* 
*Children (<18 years), adults (18-59 
$26M years), Elderly people (>59 years) 
BREAKDOWN OF PEOPLE IN NEED AND TARGETED BY STATUS, SEX AND AGE 
.. Behavior Change Communication: Through the training of healthcare providers and 
COREs, the promotion of IYCF interventions at community level and in health centers. 
.. RRM: The nutrition cluster will continue to work with RRM partners to screen 
for malnutrition and conduct rapid nutritional surveys using the "Rapid SMART" 
methodology in crisis areas including IDP sites with limited access. 
Access to nutritional care will be ensured for men, women, girls and boys of all ages and 
population groups. Nutritional data will be systematically collected, analyzed and reported by age 
group and gender. 
Efforts will be made by the cluster to ensure the complementarity of interventions with the 
various development actors present in CAR. As such, the cluster's response strategy will be 
complementary and not duplicative and will take into account other responses already underway 
by the recovery/development actors (RCPCA, World Bank, etc.). 
Accountability to affected populations will be strengthened by the Nutrition Cluster through 
awareness-raising through appropriate channels (mothers, fathers and grandmothers whose 
children are affected by acute malnutrition), the collection of feedback/complaints and the 
participation of targeted communities in decision-making throughout the nutrition project cycle. 
Cluster coordination 
The cluster will be coordinated by a coordinator, a co-facilitator and an information manager. 
Emphasis will be put on strengthening the technical capacities of the Government and partners 
for the Emergency Nutrition Response (ENR).

42 
PARTIE II: protection 
PEOPLE IN NEED PROTECTION 
2.3M 
REQUIREMENTS (US$) 
39.5M 
TARGETED PEOPLE 
1.6M 
# OF PARTNERS 
80 
Background and needs assessments 
New outbreaks of tension or violence, 
including between armed groups, particularly 
in the sub-prefectures of Bambari, Alindao, 
Ippy, Bria, Amada-Gaza, Gamboula and 
Kouango, have caused further influxes 
of displacement and more than 640,000 
internally displaced persons (IDPs), including 
37% on sites. The Child Protection (CP) 
sub-cluster estimates that 47 per cent of IDPs 
are children, of whom 12,800 are at risk of 
separation from their families. 
The presence of armed elements or weapons 
on several sites, coupled with very low or 
almost non-existent security at sites, has led to 
several attacks on IDP sites. 
Protection monitoring reported, on average, 
more than 1,000 incidents per month from 
January to September 2018. Displaced women 
and children, especially those living on sites 
and in the bush for a long period of time, 
live in very precarious conditions, which 
expose them to various protection risks. Due 
to promiscuity, very precarious conditions, 
pressure on low incomes and impunity, 
IDPs, returnees and host communities, 
especially women and children, are exposed 
to various risks of sexual exploitation and 
abuse (SEA), early and forced marriage and 
female genital mutilation. Some 5,733 GBV 
survivors were registered from January to 
August 2018 (GBVIMS), including 92 per 
cent women, 21 per cent of cases being sexual 
violence. The GBV sub-cluster estimates 
that out of a population of 2,300,000 people 
in need of protection, at least 11,500 are at 
risk of sexual violence requiring assistance. 
The signing of the protocol for information 
sharing and reporting of SEA allegations by 
MINUSCA and the humanitarian community 
in September 2018 will contribute to better 
reporting of SEA cases and facilitate referrals 
to care facilities. GBV actors should therefore 
support prevention and response efforts, 
particularly victim assistance. 
The CP sub-cluster estimates that 74,400 
children will be targeted among the 1,910,100 
in need of protection. Out of the 13,000 
children released by armed groups in 2014 
in the first half of 2018, 30 per cent are still 
waiting for a reintegration program. Many 
more children can still be seen as part of 
armed groups. Thus, the CPSC will target 
5,550 children for a reintegration program 
and 145,000 children and adolescents for 
psychosocial support activities. 
Since the beginning of 2018, there has been an 
increase in cases of physical and verbal assaults 
involving the use of firearms, which has 
increased from 1,026 cases at the end of 2017 
to 1,886 in October 2018 (data collected from 
UNHCR protection monitors). Indeed, the 
proliferation of small arms and light weapons 
(SALW) and their presence in IDP sites fuels 
community violence. 
Other more or less stable areas in CAR 
have welcomed returnees and repatriates 
(spontaneous and facilitated). According to 
the Commission on Population Movements’ 
(CMP) data, more than 241,000 IDPs returned 
from January to September 2018, including 51 
per cent in Ouham-Pendé prefecture, 16 per 
cent in Mbomou prefecture and 15 per cent in 
Ouaka prefecture. In areas of return (current 
and potential), regular monitoring of the 
protection situation is necessary to ensure that 
returnees have fair and non-discriminatory 
access to basic services existing in their areas 
and to protection services. 
Prioritization criteria 
Considering the scale and scope of needs, the 
protection actors will prioritize their response 
concurrently according to: (i) The degree of 
severity from 3 to 5 developed on the basis of 
several indicators in the 2019 HNO; (ii) any 
new needs that were not anticipated in the 
HNO analysis; (iii) the planning and response 
of other types of actors operating in CAR. 
Cluster strategy 
The Cluster strategy, including the Child 
Protection and GBV sub-clusters, is primarily 
aimed at consolidating the actions undertaken 
in 2018. However, depending on existing 
capacities and operational constraints, it aims 
to extend the response to the sub-prefectures 
of Yalinga, Bakouma, Kembé, Mingala, 
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVE 1 : 
1Strengthen the protection 
of populations affected 
by conflict through the 
reduction of aggravating factors, 
in particular the protection 
of populations affected by 
conflict through the reduction of 
aggravating factors, in particular 
violations of dignity and physical 
and moral integrity. 
SUPPORT FOR SO2 SO3 
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVE 2 : 
2Ensure access for affected 
populations to life-saving 
integrated assistance 
SUPPORT FOR SO1 , SO3 
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVE 3 : 
3Contribute to the 
empowerment of affected 
populations through the 
strengthening of mécanismes de 
protection à base communautaire 
SUPPORT FOR SO1 , SO2

43 
PARTIE II: protection 
Satema and Mobaye, which were not yet or very poorly covered so far. 
Given the distance of care facilities in several areas and operational constraints, the Protection 
cluster, including sub-clusters, will implement a fixed strategy in care facilities (health care units, 
listening and counselling centers, civil registry office, etc.) and strengthen the mobile strategy for 
greater flexibility and proximity in emergency response in order to reduce the time required to 
provide assistance to GBV survivors, children and victims of other incidents. 
In addition, protection actors, including sub-clusters and the Housing, Land and Property (HLP) 
taskforce, will contribute to strengthening the protective environment (legal and institutional). 
The strategy adopted addresses both prevention and mitigation of protection risks (specific 
objective 1), life-saving protection services and responses (specific objective 2) and capacity 
building in communities so as to contribute to the empowerment of affected populations 
(specific objective 3). 
1. Protection monitoring, specific protection responses and emergency mediation 
The Protection cluster will work to strengthen and expand the coverage of protection 
monitoring and early warning systems in the sub-prefectures of Yalinga, Bakouma, Kembé, 
Mingala, Satema and Mobaye, including the monitoring of children affected by conflict and those 
at risk of rights violations. 
Services and responses following the violations and abuses of basic rights will include specific 
services such as assistance to people with specific needs, relocation, evacuation, referrals, advice 
and assistance on ad hoc issues and documentation. People with specific needs will receive an 
appropriate response adapted to their needs. 
The complexity of the protracted protection crisis in CAR, as well as the ambivalence that allows 
both humanitarian emergency zones and others in the process of stabilization to coexist, requires 
a support to communities in intra- and inter-community mediation. Emergency mediation and 
dialogue support are tools that can also be used to facilitate access to emergency services and 
assistance for affected populations. The main interventions will consist of: 
.. Directly facilitating and/or providing technical support for intra- and inter-community 
emergency mediation; 
.. Provide technical support for dialogue between humanitarian organizations and targeted 
populations or communities in order to facilitate their access to emergency assistance. 
2. Improving prevention and multisectoral response to gender-based violence (GBV) 
The GBV sub-cluster aims to improve the access of survivors (men, women, girls and boys) to 
integrated care services that meet standards, by supporting the wider availability of such services 
in priority areas. With 8 per cent of male GBV cases recorded by GBVIMS from January to 
August 2018, more attention will be paid to the needs of male and boys survivors and children 
in general. Building on the achievements of 2018, the GBV sub-cluster will work to improve the 
availability and accessibility of legal and judicial assistance services to combat impunity. The subcluster's 
interventions in terms of care will therefore consist of: 
.. Providing a multi-sectoral assistance (medical, psychosocial, legal / judicial, socioeconomic 
reintegration) to survivors by qualified personnel, while ensuring the 
availability of post-rape kits in collaboration with the health cluster; 
.. Strengthening referral mechanisms for survivors to care services, including through the 
hotline 4040; 
.. Continued advocacy to engage the government in addressing the challenges of GBV care, 
including access to services and the systematic free issuance of the medical certificate. 
Emphasis will be placed on strategies that contribute to both prevention, risk mitigation and 
improved access to care services for survivors: 
Informing and sensitizing the population about GBV and care services, 
The establishment and strengthening of safe spaces for women and girls, and 
CONTACT 
Cluster Coordinator : 
Jacques Ajaruvwa 
Wathum 
ajaruvwa@unhcr.org 
Cluster co-facilitator : 
Steve Ndikumwenayo 
steve.ndikumwenayo@ 
nrc.no 
Sub-Cluster 
Coordinator 
Gender-based 
violence: 
Amira Diallo 
amdiallo@unfpa.org 
Sub-Cluster Cofacilitator 
: 
Ahmed Berrad 
Ahmed.Berrad@rescue. 
org 
Sub-Cluster 
Coordinator 
Child Protection : 
Hubert Gouleyo 
hgouleyo@unicef.org 
Sub-Cluster Cofacilitator: 
Justin Kaseke 
Justin.KASEKE@planinternational.
org

44 
PARTIE II: protection 
The distribution of dignity kits to the most vulnerable women and girls. 
Priority will also be given to improving the availability and use of GBV data analysis taking into account a broader geographical 
coverage of GBVIMS and an assessment of the quality of services for advocacy and improving response. 
3. Enhancing children's access to quality holistic care 
The CP sub-cluster aims to enhance access to quality holistic care for children, both girls and boys. The interventions will first be 
consolidated in the current response areas. However, within the limits of capabilities and operational constraints, the members of 
the sub-cluster will extend their interventions to other priority areas. The main interventions will consist of: 
.. Providing holistic or specific care for unaccompanied and separated children (ENAS), children leaving armed groups 
(EAFGA) and other vulnerable children; 
.. Ensure specific and community-based psychosocial care for children in distress; 
.. Support the issuance of birth certificates to ENAs, ESs, EAFGASs and vulnerable children in fifth grade and sixth grade in 
emergency education facilities. 
One of the main strategies that will be used by child protection actors will be to build on community-based child protection 
mechanisms. Community child protection networks and other community-based bodies will be revitalized and/or established to 
promote prevention and response to child protection issues in their own communities. The CP sub-cluster will further involve 
civil society organizations, community leaders and school and academic circles in raising awareness and mobilizing on different 
child protection -related themes. 
4. Strengthening protection against sexual exploitation and abuse (PSEA) 
In line with its 2018-2019 action plan, the humanitarian network for the PSEA in CAR focuses on prevention through training 
and awareness-raising for humanitarian staff and affected communities. While investigations are carried out by the internal 
structures of the organizations concerned, the actors of the GBV sub-cluster will contribute to the care of victims in collaboration 
with the Child Protection sub-cluster and the PSEA Taskforce. This will be done in accordance with the victim assistance protocol 
developed at global level. In order to improve accountability to communities, it is planned to establish and strengthen community 
complaints mechanisms. These mechanisms, in addition to the Sexual Exploitation and Abuse (SEA) Information Sharing 
Protocol, will contribute to the reporting and better management of SEA cases. 
5. Support for HLP conflict management and resolution 
The HLP Task-force intends to consolidate and expand its interventions initiated in 2017 and 2018 in areas affected by population 
displacement as well as in areas of return, local integration and resettlement. HLP humanitarian interventions will focus on people 
affected by displacement and conflict, and will aim to help them access and regain the enjoyment of their HLP rights in safety and 
dignity. The main interventions will consist of: 
.. Building the capacity of local actors, community, humanitarian and government on the protection aspects of HLP, with a 
particular focus on women's HLP rights; 
.. Providing adequate assistance to affected persons to exercise their HLP rights, including the legal security of their rights; 
.. Expanding the national database of HLPs and the database for identifying and monitoring HLP conflicts in priority 
prefectures; 
.. Strengthening the referral system for cases of HLP rights violations; 
.. Building capacity within communities on conflict prevention and peaceful resolution, including HLP and land conflicts; 
.. Providing technical and material support to authorities and community leaders in the development of the national 
restitution policy. 
6. Enhancing community engagement and social mobilization 
In view of the context and the protracted protection crisis, the Protection cluster, including sub-clusters and associated taskforces, 
will build capacities and structures at community level to contribute to the empowerment of the affected population, while also 
supporting their resilience. This approach is made necessary in particular by the fact that more than 60 per cent of the estimated 
IDPs in CAR are in host families and whose host communities have borne and continue to bear the brunt through the spirit of 
solidarity. The aim will be therefore to set up and strengthen Community protection mechanisms covering the areas of general 
protection, of CP and GBV.

45 
PARTIE II: protection 
The enhancement of risk education on explosive remnants of war (ERW) and small arms and light weapons (SALW) will be 
carried out in coordination with UNMAS and other types of actors working in this sector in CAR. 
Cross-cutting Protection 
Given the cross-cutting nature of protection, the Protection cluster will keep on promoting, within the inter-cluster framework, 
the integration and consideration of cross-cutting protection aspects by all clusters throughout the humanitarian programming 
cycle. To this end, the Protection cluster will support the establishment of a pool of trainers made up of the focal points designated 
by the other clusters. In addition, the Protection cluster, including the associated sub-clusters and task-forces, will build on the 
achievements of 2017 and 2018 in terms of adapting evaluation and monitoring tools. The cluster will also monitor the integration 
of inclusion issues within the technical sectors. 
Collaboration with other clusters and actors 
The Protection cluster, including sub-clusters and associated taskforces, will consolidate the current specific areas of collaboration 
with government technical services and other clusters. This will include: 
.. Continue collaboration with the Ministry of Humanitarian Action and National Reconciliation through the project to 
support the return of displaced persons to CAR (PARET), the monitoring the movement of the population; 
.. Continue to support the Joint Rapid Response and Repression Unit for Sexual Violence Against Women and Children 
(UMIRR) in the holistic management of GBV cases; 
.. Continue to support the establishment and functioning of prefectural and sub-prefectural committees to combat GBV and 
harmful practices; 
.. Provide technical support to other clusters for the consideration and implementation of IASC guidelines on GBV as well as 
in the consideration of HLP rights in their programs; 
.. Strengthen collaboration between the SCVBG and the health cluster for the mental health response for survivors and 
clinical management of rape cases; 
.. Maintain the link with the Durable Solutions Taskforce, in particular to alert on the risks of protection in areas of return, 
local integration or resettlement in order to ensure that returnees have equitable and non-discriminatory access to existing 
services in areas of return, local integration or resettlement of IDPs. 
.. Provide support to the National Commission to combat the proliferation of SALW 
Cash terms and conditions 
Due to the complexity of protection responses and the urgent need to focus first on guaranteeing the quality of certain items made 
available to survivors, the use of cash as a method of intervention is not obvious in many protection interventions. Nevertheless, 
in some instances, such as the issuance of birth certificates, efforts towards obtaining titles to secure Housing Land and Property 
(HLP) rights where cash modalities are possible, the Protection cluster and sub-clusters work within the Cash Taskforce to define 
the minimum basket and explore the best feasibility in order to apply cash in the programming. 
Accountability 
The Protection cluster, including HLP sub-clusters and taskforces, will promote the accountability of their members to the 
beneficiary populations through in particular: 
.. Promoting the use of the free 4040 hotline to collect feedback from beneficiaries; 
.. GBV security audits to identify possible risk mitigation actions; 
.. A survey on the quality of GBV/SEA management services to improve response; 
.. Follow-up with cluster members to verify the level and regularity of feedback to beneficiaries' complaints. 
Coordination 
In 2019, coordination efforts will continue with fully dedicated staff for cluster and sub-cluster coordination as well as for 
GBVIMS and the SEA Taskforce. Capacity building in information management by dedicated staff in the cluster and sub-clusters 
will be essential for better monitoring and regular analysis of the data collected. Strengthening coordination at the regional level 

46 
PARTIE II: protection 
- 0.6M 0.3M 0.3M 1.2M 
- 0.6M 0.3M 0.3M 0.5M 
51% 
51% 
50| 46| 4% 
50 | 46| 4% 
BY STATUS BY SEX & AGE 
People in NEED 
TARGETED PEOPLE 
REQUIRED FUNDS 
Refugees 
Non Displaced 
People 
IDPs Returnees/ 
Rapatriates 
Host 
Communities 
% female % children, 
adults, Elderly 
people* 
*Children (<18 years), adults (18-59 
$39,5M years), Elderly people (>59 years) 
BREAKDOWN OF PEOPLE IN NEED AND TARGETED BY STATUS, SEX AND AGE 
will be a priority in view of proximity on the ground for a better quality of response

47 
PARTIE II: HEALTH 
PEOPLE IN NEED HEALTH 
2.09M 
REQUIREMENTS (US$) 
28.8M 
TARGETED PEOPLE 
892k 
# OF PARTNERS 
64 
Background and needs analysis 
The results of the sectoral analysis of the 
severity of needs carried out in September 
2018 show a worrying health situation. 
Indeed, in 36 sub-prefectures out of 79, the 
proportion of people in need of emergency 
health assistance was between 60 and 100 
per cent (severity level 3; 4 or 5) according 
to the health cluster estimates. Of these 36 
sub-prefectures, 19 have a level of severity of 
needs equal to 3; 16 have a level of severity 
of needs equal to 4 and one with a level 5. 
According to the estimates of the health 
cluster, in sub-prefectures with severity levels 
3, 4 and 5, about 60 per cent; 80 per cent 
and 100 per cent of the population requires 
emergency health assistance. In addition to 
these 36 sub-prefectures, 7 sub-prefectures, 
although classified at severity level 2 (5th 
arrondissement of Bangui, Gamboula, Bouar, 
Paoua, Bouca, Kabo, Ndele). 
The analyses of the cluster partners lead to the 
conclusion that among the 2,089,032 people in 
need of health assistance: 
.. 167,000 need reproductive health care 
.. 2,089,000 need curative care, including 
973,489 children under 5 years of age 
.. 912,500 need an insecticide-treated net 
.. 16,000 war wounded need surgical, 
trauma and/or rehabilitation care 
.. 28,000 children aged 6-59 months 
living in IDP sites need immunization 
against measles and other antigens 
.. 4,000 people need mental health care 
.. 1,400,000 people have preventive 
actions against epidemic risks 
Prioritization criteria 
In 2019, the health cluster will operate in 42 
sub-prefectures identified as priorities out of 
79 in CAR. Given the scale of the needs, the 
presence of recovery actors (Bêkou Fund, 
Séni Project, UNICEF Community IMCI 
Project, Global Fund, GAVI, etc.) and the 
need to ensure that they are fully involved 
in the recovery process, it is essential to 
ensure that they have the necessary resources. 
and partners outside the Humanitarian 
Response Plan (HRP) in CAR, the criteria 
used to prioritize sub-prefectures were: the 
level of severity of health needs, the weight 
of displaced/returnees/repatriate people 
and whether or not there is a development 
project or humanitarian partner outside 
the Humanitarian Response Plan with 
funding covering the entire year 2019 and 
interventions that cover all or part of the 
needs of the area. Thus 37 sub-prefectures 
with a level of severity higher than or equal 
to three were initially selected as well as 6 
sub-prefectures with a level of severity of 
health needs equal to 2 with a proportion 
of displaced/returnees /repatriate persons 
higher than 10 per cent were prioritized. The 
Bria sub-prefecture, whose needs are entirely 
covered by the Bêkou Fund project and the 
interventions of a humanitarian partner 
outside HRP have been excluded. 
The estimate of the targeted populations took 
into account the proportion of populations 
whose needs are covered by recovery/ 
development projects or humanitarian 
partners outside the HRP. 
The cluster partners targeted 892,679 people 
in need of health assistance, all targeted by 
curative interventions, 89,300 by reproductive 
and sexual health interventions, and 300,000 
by preventive and health promotion actions. 
.. 10 per cent of the targeted population 
of 89,268 girls/women and boys/men 
will receive emergency health care in 
areas affected by humanitarian shocks, 
including 14,000 children aged 6-59 
months living in measles immunization 
sites, 10,000 households living in 
mosquito net sites, 1,000 seriously 
injured in emergency surgical and 
trauma care and 1,000 visibly pregnant 
women of the hygiene delivery kit. 
.. 90 per cent of the targeted people, that 
is to say 803,411 inhabitants consisting 
of children under five years of age, 
lactating women, pregnant women, 
people aged 60 years and above, people 
living with a motor disability and 
people affected by life-threatening 
emergencies, will have easier access to 
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVE1 : 
1Provide emergency health 
care to populations affected 
by a humanitarian shock 
SUPPORT FOR SO1 
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVE 2 : 
2Improve access to quality 
primary and secondary 
health care for the most 
vulnerable populations in areas 
of severe need 3, 4 and 5 and in 
areas of return 
SUPPORT FOR SO2 
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVE 3 : 
3Early detection of epidemics 
and organization of the 
response 
SUPPORT FOR SO1

48 
PARTIE II: HEALTH 
essential reproductive health services, curative, preventive, functional and promotional 
health services, including those for chronic diseases (HIV, tuberculosis, diabetes, high 
blood pressure, mental health disorders) and epidemics. 
Cluster strategy 
In 2019, the partners in the health cluster will build their capacities to fill persistent gaps in the 
sector, particularly in the areas of mental health, chronic disease management, rapid response to 
epidemics and humanitarian shocks, and advocacy efforts will be undertaken to improve access 
and protection for humanitarian actors and mobilize more financial resources. The cluster's 
efforts will focus on the following actions: 
In areas affected by a humanitarian shock: 
.. Manage surgical, trauma and rehabilitation injuries; 
.. Immunize children 6-59 months of age against measles and other antigens, if applicable; 
.. Distribute mosquito nets (LLIN) to households; 
.. Manage the most common diseases (malaria, acute kidney failure, diarrhea); 
.. Provide psychological first aid care; 
.. Implement the minimum reproductive health package (ensure medical and psychological 
care for rape survivors, distribute male and female condoms to sexually active people, 
distribute hygienic delivery kits to visibly pregnant women and midwives - areas where 
access to health care is impossible - ensure management of obstetric and neonatal 
emergencies, guarantee safe blood transfusion, ensure syndromic management of STIs) 
.. Ensure the referral and counter-referral of vital emergencies; 
.. Support the management of chronic diseases (HIV, tuberculosis, diabetes, high blood 
pressure); 
.. Collect, verify and analyze data on attacks on the health system. 
In areas with severity needs level 2; 3; 4; 5 and Areas of Return: 
.. Ensure the free provision of quality curative care to the most vulnerable populations 
(training of staff on integrated management of child and newborn diseases, medicines, 
equipment, bonuses); 
.. b. Restore the provision of essential reproductive health services (train/recycle health 
service providers on family planning, care for rape survivors and emergency obstetric 
and neonatal care, provide health facilities with reproductive health kits, make condom 
distribution points operational, deploy midwives and doctors in selected health facilities 
to provide emergency obstetric and neonatal care); 
.. c. Monitor the activities of health facilities including formative supervision; 
.. d. Ensure the management of mental illnesses (training of providers on MhGAP, drug 
supply, supervision); 
.. e. Support the referral and counter-referral of vital emergencies. 
In areas with a major epidemic risk: 
.. Ensure the collection, transmission, compilation, analysis and interpretation of 
epidemiological surveillance data; 
.. Ensure the collection and delivery in Bangui or outside of Bangui of samples for diseases 
with epidemic potential; 
.. Support the investigation of epidemic alerts; 
.. Provide laboratories with equipment and reagents for the diagnosis of diseases with 
epidemic potential; 
CONTACT 
Cluster Coordinator : 
Dr Richar FOTSING 
fotsing@who.int 
Cluster co-facilitator : 
Dr Arsène 
BIRINGANINE 
ELIMU 
cofacilitateurclusternutrca@
gmail.com 

49 
PARTIE II: HEALTH 
.. Support free case management in epidemic situations; 
.. Recycle health personnel on surveillance of major epidemic risks and maternal deaths (MDSR); 
.. Train community health promoters on surveillance of major epidemic risks and maternal deaths (MDSR); 
.. Support the organization of immunization campaigns to respond to epidemics; 
.. Implement epidemic risk communication activities. 
These actions will be carried out in health facilities or in communities. Strategies for their implementation will depend on the 
context. These strategies include support for existing health facilities, the establishment of temporary health facilities, mobile care 
teams (or mobile clinics), community care sites (malaria/oral rehydration points, IMCI sites) and mass campaigns (distribution of 
mosquito nets or condoms, immunization). The implementation of intermittent preventive treatment of malaria in children under 
one year of age and pregnant women will be discussed for consideration and support. Mobile clinics where a minimum package of 
curative, preventive and promotional care is provided and community care sites will be given priority in areas of difficult access or 
remote from health facilities. 
Link with other sectors: the partnership with the Nutrition, Water, Hygiene and Sanitation (WASH) and Gender-based Violence 
(GBV) clusters will be strengthened in integration efforts to increase the impact and efficiency of our interventions. In this regard, 
the Health Cluster will focus on multisectoral coordination (WASH, nutrition, GBV) and the integration of nutrition into the 
health intervention package. 
Thus, the sectoral health response will be implemented in complementarity with the responses of other sectors such as: 
.. WASH: As part of the control of diseases with faecal-oral transmission (acute watery diarrhea, bloody diarrhea, cholera, 
Hepatitis E, etc.) or favored by poor hygiene and sanitation conditions (Ebola virus disease, monkey pox, malaria, yellow 
fever, etc.). 
.. Nutrition: The integration of the screening and management of malnutrition during curative consultations and 
immunization activities will ensure better medical and nutritional care for malnourished children and contribute to the 
reduction of infant and child mortality. By taking into account the priority areas of the nutrition sector by the health sector, 
the medical causes of malnutrition can be addressed. 
.. GBV: To achieve the objective of providing medical care for at least 80 per cent of rape cases within 72 hours, partners in 
the health sector must work in collaboration with protection partners who work to prevent and control GBV. 
.. Education: for health promotion and health risk communication activities important for the control of epidemics and other 
public health events. 
.. CwC (communicating with communities): for health promotion and health risk communication activities that are 
important in the fight against epidemics and other public health events. 
.. Efforts will be made by the health cluster to ensure that their interventions complement those of the relief/development 
actors and humanitarian partners outside the HRP operating in Central Africa. The health cluster activity package in 
areas of return or severity level 2; 3 and 4 will help to restore the provision of essential health services and bridge the gap 
between emergency response and the recovery of local health systems. 
Accountability: Accountability to affected populations will be strengthened by the health cluster through collaboration with 
community leaders in the partners' intervention areas, in order to share information on our various interventions with them 
and collect their feedback/complaints. On the ground, health facility management committees will be revitalized and involved in 
decision-making on interventions throughout the health project cycle. 
The results of health actions will be disaggregated as much as possible by gender and age group, analyzed and interpreted for 
decision-making purposes to ensure that there is equitable access to health services for both genders and all age groups. The 
partners in the health cluster will systematically share data on their activities with the coordination team and this data will be 
analyzed and published regularly in the cluster's newsletters. 
Efforts will be made by the cluster to ensure that its interventions complement those of the recovery/development actors and non- 
HRP humanitarian partners present in the Central African Republic. In this regard, the prioritization in the health sector has taken 
into account the ongoing development projects in the country (Bêkou Fund, PECIME/UNICEF/EU, Global Fund, World Bank, 
etc.), as well as those of non-HRP partners. Finally, the health cluster's package of activities in areas of return or severity level 2; 3; 
4; 5 will help to restore the supply of essential health services and bridge the gap between emergency response and the recovery of 
local health systems.

50 
PARTIE II: HEALTH 
Cash terms and conditions: The main cash modalities in the health sector are: 
.. Payment of transport packages to motorcycle taxis or other vehicles that have facilitated 
the referral of life-threatening emergencies to health facilities; 
.. Payment of daily subsistence expenses to one patient guard per sick person referred and 
interned in a care facility; 
.. The payment of premiums to the health personnel of a health facility or service in order 
to ensure that health actions and care are free of charge for the population 
Cross-cutting protection 
The interventions of the health cluster partners will systematically take into account the elements 
that will improve access to health services for the most vulnerable people, promote respect for 
the dignity of beneficiaries through their consultation and participation in needs assessments, 
project implementation and evaluation. Data on the results of partners' interventions will be 
disaggregated by gender and age group and analyzed to identify gender and age inequalities in 
order to address them and provide equitable access to the services offered by partners in the 
health cluster. 
Cluster coordination 
The coordination of the health cluster will be ensured at national level by a dedicated 
coordinator, co-facilitator and information manager. To fill coordination gaps at the level of 
health regions, the health/nutrition clusters of Kaga Bandoro, Bambari, Bria and Bangassou will 
be maintained. In Bossangoa, Berberati and Bouar, government or UNICEF capacities will be 
strengthened to coordinate interventions in the health sector. The health cluster will coordinate 
with recovery/development actors, other humanitarian sectors and the Centre for Emergency 
Operations in Public Health (COUSP). 
- 0.5M 0.2M 1.2M 0.1M 
- 0.3M 0.1M 0.4M 0.1M 
51% 
51% 
50| 46| 4% 
50 | 46| 4% 
BY STATUS BY SEX & AGE 
People in NEED 
TARGETED PEOPLE 
REQUIRED FUNDS 
Refugees 
Non Displaced 
People 
IDPs Returnees/ 
Rapatriates 
Host 
Communities 
% female % children, 
adults, Elderly 
people* 
*Children (<18 years), adults (18-59 
$28.8M years), Elderly people (>59 years) 
BREAKDOWN OF PEOPLE IN NEED AND TARGETED BY STATUS, SEX AND AGE

51 
PARTIE II: FOOD SECURITY 
PEOPLE IN NEED FOOD SECURITY 
1.9M 
REQUIREMENTS (US$) 
TARGETED PEOPLE 
1.6M 
# OF PARTNERS 
110 
Background and needs analysis 
The September 2018 CPI analysis indicates 
that 1.9 million people, or about 40 per cent of 
the total population, are acutely food insecure 
(CPI Phase 3&4). The most vulnerable 
populations are found mainly in conflictaffected 
prefectures with high proportions 
of displaced populations. It is estimated that 
550,000 people are in phase 4-IPC (12 per cent 
of the population analyzed) and 1,350,000 are 
in phase 3-CPI (30 per cent of the population). 
Out of a total population of 4.6 million at the 
end of August 2018, the number of internally 
displaced persons was 621,035, a decrease of 
12 per cent compared to March 2018 (700,000 
people). 
The main factors aggravating food insecurity 
include: structural household poverty, 
persistent insecurity, increased intercommunity 
clashes in several localities, 
massive population movements, agricultural 
deficits and declining crop diversification, as 
well as continued use of limited adaptation 
strategies. This leads to a decrease in the 
level of production and a disruption in 
supply chains. Vulnerable populations 
have inadequate, very limited diversity and 
insufficient food consumption. 
Food insecurity particularly affects refugee 
households, internally displaced people and 
returnees (ENSA, 2017). Host communities 
are also not spared; the impact of repeated 
displacement plunges communities already 
weakened by multiple conflict cycles into 
humanitarian crisis, resulting in pressure on 
livelihoods and the sharing of scarce resources 
between displaced and host communities. 
Prioritization criteria 
Interventions developed by food security 
actors will focus primarily on crisis and 
emergency areas (CPI phases 3 and 4). Food 
security actors will provide a humanitarian 
response to the multiple needs and 
vulnerabilities described in the Humanitarian 
Needs Overview (HNO). Food assistance 
for populations in emergency (CPI phase 4) 
and crisis (CPI phase 3) should continue in 
order to ensure adequate consumption for 
vulnerable populations (displaced persons 
on sites and in host families, vulnerable 
households in host communities, returnees 
and refugees). In addition, food security actors 
will develop livelihood support activities for 
more vulnerable men, women, girls and boys 
to empower them. 
Cluster strategy 
The partners in the food security cluster plan 
to meet the immediate food needs of the 
most vulnerable populations. The response 
will be based on the following three specific 
objectives: 
.. Improve food availability and access 
for acutely food-insecure populations, 
in particular more vulnerable men and 
women, girls and boys. 
.. Enhance the resilience of vulnerable 
populations to food crises and support 
the restoration of livelihoods and 
emergency agricultural production. 
.. Establish a monitoring mechanism to 
ensure access to information on food 
developments by ensuring gender 
sensitivity and conflict sensitivity. 
The projects developed will contribute to 
improving access to food, essential agricultural 
inputs, revitalizing markets, strengthening 
purchasing power, transferring skills and 
building capacity, supporting agricultural 
production, protecting crops and ensuring 
minimal control of crop diseases. The various 
projects developed by the partners in the 
food security cluster will systematically 
integrate cross-cutting themes such as gender, 
protection, accountability, conflict analysis 
and will be implemented in an integrated 
manner, including innovative approaches such 
as cash transfer (CBT) and local procurement. 
Food security actors will develop quality 
programs and set up appropriate monitoring 
and reporting mechanisms and will also be 
encouraged to establish strong partnerships 
with government bodies, national NGOs 
and the private sector. Food security 
cluster partners will encourage support for 
beneficiaries in areas of return. In order to 
ensure access to food in the intervention areas, 
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVE 1 : 
1Improve food availability 
and access for acutely 
food-insecure populations, 
especially vulnerable men and 
women, girls and boys. 
SUPPORT FOR SO1 SO3 
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVE 2 : 
2Enhance the resilience of 
vulnerable populations to 
food crises and support 
the restoration of livelihoods and 
emergency agricultural production. 
SUPPORT FOR SO1 , SO3 
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVE 3 : 
3Strengthen needs 
assessments, monitoring and 
early warning mechanisms 
and ensure access to information 
on food developments by ensuring 
gender sensitivity and conflict 
sensitivity. 
SUPPORT FOR SO1 , SO3 
168.5M

52 
PARTIE II: FOOD SECURITY 
dialogue with communities, respect for humanitarian principles and an acceptance-based strategy 
will be crucial. Specific support for transhumant populations dependent on livestock will also 
be provided according to identified needs and with a view to encouraging cohabitation between 
herders and farmers 
Link with other sectors 
The food security cluster will work in coordination with other clusters such as: nutrition, 
WASH, health, protection, MSSC, logistics, ETC, education (school feeding) and RRM. 
Integrated responses with these clusters will be encouraged. Participation in the Inter-Cluster 
and other coordination mechanisms remains guaranteed. The Food Security Cluster will 
actively participate in joint missions, cross-sectoral analysis and encourage the development 
and implementation of integrated projects. The use of existing logistical facilities will also be 
encouraged and will thus ensure better coordination with the Logistics Cluster. 
Cash Transfer-based Program (CBT) 
In areas of the country with a functioning market, the food security cluster will encourage 
humanitarian partners to use cash transfer-based programming approaches (CBT) through 
agricultural fairs, voucher distribution, market revitalization, based on the best practices 
developed in 2018 by many partners. For 2019, food security actors are encouraged to develop 
strategic partnerships to improve household living conditions and support a rapid recovery of the 
local economy. The interest, choice and dignity of beneficiaries will be central to CBT's business 
planning. The minimum basket of expenses will be harmonized by referring to the WFP basket 
based on food price trends. Discussions on the minimum basket were launched in September 
2018; they will have to be finalized while keeping the possibility of adjusting the minimum basket 
according to the context and the area. 
Cross-cutting protection 
The intervention modalities will ensure the integration of protection and will be developed in 
accordance with the key principles of cross-sectoral protection: (i) Do not harm - safety and 
dignity, (ii) Protection of specific access. Food security actors will ensure that communities are 
aware of the activities to be developed in the selected areas, and will ensure that distribution sites 
are secure in order to reduce the beneficiaries' exposure to protection risks. The beneficiaries 
of the various projects will be women, men, girls and boys, keeping in mind the notion of age. 
The projects proposed by food security actors will include indicators to assess cross-cutting 
protection. The beneficiaries will be made aware of their rights in relation to the projects 
developed. 
Accountability 
The needs of men, women, girls and boys will be taken into account in the various projects. 
Active participation of beneficiaries in all phases of the project will be recommended (needs 
analysis, response planning, implementation, monitoring and evaluation and learning). Food 
security actors will be encouraged to strengthen communication with beneficiaries before, during 
and after the project. Complaint monitoring and management mechanisms will be defined in all 
projects that could include indicators to assess accountability. 
Link with other development actors 
Food security actors will maintain coordination and information sharing with development 
actors in order to increase complementarity of actions and harmonize targeting criteria. 
Food security actors will encourage partnerships with development actors, particularly in the 
context of local purchasing projects, economic revitalization (CBT) and will actively work with 
CONTACT 
Cluster Coordinator: 
Ernest-Moise 
Mushekuru 
Abel.kongbo@fao.org 
Cluster co-facilitator : 
(ACTED): 

53 
PARTIE II: FOOD SECURITY 
farmers' organizations and technical State bodies where possible. Short-term interventions 
by humanitarian actors will be complemented by medium- to long-term interventions by 
development actors to promote effectiveness and eradicate the structural causes of food 
insecurity in the country. 
Coordination 
In 2019, the food security cluster will ensure continuity of the actions taken in 2018. The 
cluster coordination efforts undertaken in 2018 will be maintained with fully dedicated staff 
(1 Coordinator, 1 IMO, 1 Co-Facilitator). The regional sub-clusters of Bouar, Bambari, 
Kaga-Bandoro, Paoua, Kaga-Bandoro, Bossangoa and Boda will continue to be operational 
and will be supported by a mobile expert. The food security cluster will build its capacity to 
coordinate, monitor and collect data with national actors. This will enable emergency responses 
to be triggered in coordination with humanitarian partners. These will be based on existing 
coordination mechanisms such as the National Food Safety Assessment (ENSA), CFSAM and 
CPI. 
31K 0.7M 0.4M 0.8M 20K 
31K 0.6M 0.3M 0.7M 10K 
51% 
51% 
50| 46| 4% 
50 | 46| 4% 
BY STATUS BY SEX & AGE 
People in NEED 
TARGETED PEOPLE 
REQUIRED FUNDS 
Refugees 
Non Displaced 
People 
IDPs Returnees/ 
Rapatriates 
Host 
Communities 
% female % children, 
adults, Elderly 
people* 
*Children (<18 years), adults (18-59 
$2.3M $166M years), Elderly people (>59 years) 
BREAKDOWN OF PEOPLE IN NEED AND TARGETED BY STATUS, SEX AND AGE

54 
PARTIE II: EMERGENCY TELECOMUNICATIONS 
PEOPLE IN NEED EMERGENCY TELECOMUNICATIONS 
Support to the 
humanitarian 
community 
REQUIREMENTS (US$) 
1.5M 
TARGETED PEOPLE 
Support to the 
humanitarian 
community 
# OF PARTNERS 
50 
Context and needs analysis 
The instability and insecurity of humanitarian 
assistance response areas requires reliable 
means of communication in order to facilitate 
access and transmission of information 
required to assist the population while 
contributing to the safety of humanitarian 
actors. 
As it happens, telecommunications 
infrastructure is almost non-existent in 
humanitarian assistance areas of operation. 
This is due to the absence of State bodies and 
the destruction of private sector facilities 
in conflict areas. Thus, Internet and mobile 
telephone networks are only operating in 
some sub-prefectures in CAR and do not 
cover the entire country. 
To overcome these obstacles and support 
humanitarian actors, the Emergency 
Telecommunications Cluster (ETC) plans to: 
.. The provision and stabilization of 
Internet access via satellite links 
to humanitarian actors in priority 
humanitarian response areas; 
.. The provision and stabilization of 
voice communications networks used 
as part of the security of humanitarian 
actors; 
.. Ensure the continuity of Internet 
access in localities where the service 
has been provided since the outbreak 
of the crisis in CAR through the 
establishment of cost-sharing 
arrangements among humanitarian 
agencies; 
.. The reinforcement of the stock of 
telecommunications equipment as part 
of the contingency plan to ensure a 
rapid response in new localities; 
.. Continue training IT and 
telecommunications staff of 
government institutions, UN agencies 
and NGOs to consolidate infrastructure 
management and have local expertise 
ready to respond to crisis situations; 
.. Continue holding training sessions for 
radio users and operators on the use of 
the means of communication available 
to them. 
Prioritization criteria 
The ETC responds in humanitarian 
areas considered as priority zones by the 
humanitarian community and defined as 
"common" (more than two organizations 
operating in the same locality). The ETC 
plans to establish IT and telecommunications 
services in the west of the country, particularly 
in the prefecture of Mambéré Kadéi, and 
more specifically in Amada-Gaza, Gamboula 
and Berberati, in view of the gaps identified 
in these areas and in order to support access 
to the population by humanitarian actors. 
The ETC plans to equip these localities with 
Internet connections via the satellite network, 
VHF radio telecommunications networks in 
communication centers managed by UNDSS. 
In addition, the ETC plans to ensure 
connectivity continuity in the last three 
established areas of Central East and South: 
Bria, Alindao and Bangassou. The areas 
established since the crisis in CAR will be 
supported until the establishment of cost 
sharing arrangements within humanitarian 
organizations, namely in: Bambari, Bouar, 
Kaga Bandoro, N'Delé, Bossangoa and Paoua. 
Cluster strategy 
In 2019, the ETC will focus its efforts on 
new priority communities that require 
communications means rapidly. 
Following the needs assessment in Bambari, 
Bouar, Kaga Bandoro, N'Delé, Bossangoa and 
Paoua (locations provided by ETC services 
since 2014), ETC confirms that these localities 
are no longer a priority in terms of ETC 
service gaps because they have had a stable 
presence of some humanitarian organizations 
in recent years but need to maintain an 
independent Internet connection. The ETC 
will support the transition of established 
services by establishing the cost sharing of 
services provided with local agencies and 
organizations. 
As part of the improvement of security 
networks, a project to digitize and 
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVE 1: 
1Provide emergency 
telecommunications 
services to humanitarian 
organizations 
SUPPORT FOR SO1 ,SO2 
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVE 2 : 
2Provide internet access 
services to humanitarian 
organisations 
SUPPORT FOR SO1 , SO3 
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVE 3 : 
3Ensure the sustainability of 
telecommunication services. 
SUPPORT FOR SO1 , SO2

55 
PARTIE II: EMERGENCY TELECOMUNICATIONS 
interconnect the VHF network between Bangui and the field offices is proposed. This project 
will also help to optimize the network, add new functionalities to strengthen the security of 
humanitarian actors in the country. It should be noted that the ETC is ready to manage the 
project and its implementation, but the funds are not included in the ETC project. It is planned 
to share the costs separately between the relevant agencies. Therefore, funds must be available in 
advance before equipment can be purchased and staff mobilized. 
In a bid to promote national infrastructure, the ETC will keep on engaging and supporting local 
mobile operators for the reactivation/extension of GSM telephone networks. 
Finally, the ETC considers exploring the communication needs of the internally displaced 
population and developing tailor-made services to strengthen their direct access to information 
and/or between humanitarian programs (education, complaint and electronic feedback 
mechanisms), as part of the ETC's new services to the population and to improve the overall 
humanitarian response in CAR. 
Support for Strategic Objective 1 (SO1) 
ETC has provided common communication and information technology services for 
humanitarian organizations operating in 11 locations: Kaga-Bandoro, Bossangoa, N'Delé, 
Bambari, Bangui, Bouar, Bria, Alindao, Bangassou, Papua and Zemio (in temporary 
interruption). In 2019, it projects establishing services in the communities of: Amada-Gaza, 
Gamboula and Berberati. 
Support for Strategic Objective 3 (SO3) 
The working group established will be more involved to better ensure the transition phase from 
direct infrastructure management by the cluster to ongoing management by agencies under the 
coordination of the inter-agency working group, and the response to emerging needs. 
In order to ensure the maintenance service of the systems in place, a local team will be recruited 
and trained to ensure the maintenance of the telecommunications services established. 
Coordination and information management 
The ETC has established a cluster coordination unit in Bangui and plans to maintain a dedicated 
coordinator. In order to ensure proper coordination of activities and address communication 
needs, the coordinator convenes representatives of humanitarian organizations to meetings 
of the cluster working group. They interact and collect the needs of humanitarian actors, plan 
responses to avoid duplication of efforts and contribute to strengthening collaboration with 
government institutions, NGOs, UN agencies and UNIMSM. 
The information is presented and shared during ETC global and local meetings, on the Internet 
page https://www.etcluster.org/emergencies/central-african-republic-conflict as well as through 
the handout of service maps, situation reports, etc. 
CONTACT 
Cluster Coordinator: 
NDIATH 
Mohamedou 
Mohamedouabou. 
ndiath@wfp.org 
CAR.ETC 
car.etc@wfp.org

56 
PARTIE II: coordination 
PEOPLE IN NEED COORDINATION 
Soutien à la 
communauté 
humanitaire 
REQUIREMENTS (US$) 
11.9M 
TARGETED PEOPLE 
Soutien à la 
communauté 
humanitaire 
# OF PARTNERS 
139 
As the humanitarian situation continues to 
deteriorate and humanitarian needs increase, 
robust coordination will be central to a 
humanitarian response based on humanitarian 
principles and the principle of "do no harm". 
This coordination will maximize the effective 
and efficient use of the limited resources 
available to humanitarian actors. 
The complexity of the operational 
environment, which is characterized by a 
prolonged conflict and new hotbeds of tension 
in several regions of the country, requires 
coordinated measures to enable humanitarian 
partners to "stay and deliver". As long as new 
areas are affected by crises, including in hardto-
reach areas, rapid information-gathering 
capacities and rapid response teams will be 
activated. 
Taking into account the follow-up to the 
recommendations of the P2P assessment 
mission carried out in 2017, support to the 
Humanitarian Coordinator, to the Country 
Humanitarian Team and to the ICC will be 
prioritized at national level, with a view to 
their central role in decision-making at the 
strategic and operational level. This will 
be complemented by efforts to strengthen 
coordination at the field level, including 
in remote areas, and to improve linkages 
between national and regional coordination 
bodies. The performance and capacity 
assessment of clusters and ICC will also 
contribute to strengthening and improving 
the coordination of humanitarian response. 
Humanitarian partners will continue 
promoting accountability to affected 
populations: the quality of humanitarian 
action will depend on the participation 
of affected people in all stages of the 
response. The coordination will support the 
humanitarian community in the development, 
implementation and monitoring of the 
humanitarian response plan, by strengthening 
evidence-based response analysis to promote 
accountability with all parties. 
Multi-sectoral assessments and their analysis 
using standard tools will provide the evidence 
needed to prioritize the response, especially in 
areas where needs are most severe. A quality 
response will be supported, with sharing 
of good practices, especially on protection, 
gender, cash and accountability to affected 
populations. Information and needs analysis 
will incorporate the views of affected people 
as well as data disaggregated by gender, sex 
and age to allow for a balanced response and 
will highlight civilian protection and access 
constraints. OCHA will ensure the monitoring 
of the effective implementation of the action 
plan on humanitarian access and ensure, 
through its humanitarian funding unit, that 
projects funded by the Humanitarian Fund are 
aligned with the priorities of the HRP and the 
accountability framework of the fund. 
Coordination will ensure collaboration with 
recovery and development actors, within 
the framework of the New Way of Working 
(NWW). Given that CAR is still in an 
acute humanitarian crisis, the transition to 
development and recovery projects must 
not be made at the expense of sustained and 
continuous support for the humanitarian 
response. Improved coordination between 
funding mechanisms remains necessary 
and will be one of the priorities in 2019 to 
operationalize the new way of working. The 
CHT will renew its engagement with donors 
to determine the best financial mechanisms to 
address needs and funding gaps, and monitor 
gaps resulting from poor coordination 
between actors responsible for delivering aid 
and updating programs. 
The coordination will focus on the following 
activities: 
Emergency preparedness and response, 
including acceptance: 
.. Development of contingency plans 
(regional/national); 
.. Setting up rapid emergency teams, 
by ensuring that a protection actor is 
always a member; 
.. Development of standard emergency 
response procedures in accordance 
with IASC guidelines; 
.. Regular updating of inventory records; 
.. Risk mitigation, including those 
associated with local partners; 
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVE 1 : 
1Coordination renforcée pour 
une réponse humanitaire 
plus efficace, adaptée au 
contexte opérationnel et ancrée 
sur les principes humanitaires 
SUPPORT FOR SO1 ,SO2 
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVE 2 : 
2Analyse contextuelle intégrée 
et crédible et plaidoyer basée 
sur l’ évidence 
APPUI L’ OS1 , SO3 
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVE 3 : 
3Redevabilité envers les 
populations affectées 
SUPPORT FOR SO1 , SO2 , 
SO3

57 
PARTIE II: coordination 
.. Pooling of efforts to strengthen local and international staff; 
.. Development of emergency response training for national staff. 
Integrated and credible contextual analysis and evidence-based advocacy 
.. Planning of multisectoral assessments (RRM, REACH, ICC), inter-agency/inter-sectoral 
assessments); 
.. Enhancing the analytical capacities of humanitarian actors: some prerequisites will 
have to be taken into account, especially the harmonization of assessment tools and 
data comparability, the disaggregation of gender/age data by sub-prefecture, and the 
monitoring of needs in hard-to-reach areas as well as a strengthening of inclusive 
diagnosis approaches and implementation of activities in the field; 
.. Elaboration of response maps, achievements and gaps in response, including mapping of 
areas where cash transfer operations are feasible; 
.. Monitoring and analysis of access constraints and enhancing joint advocacy (analysis and 
impact report, computer graphics); 
.. Continuation of the implementation of the guidance handbooks for civil-military 
coordination; 
.. Analysis of parties and mapping of "access influencers" to inform engagement with the 
parties to the conflict. 
.. Organization of training sessions on humanitarian principles, access negotiations for 
humanitarian personnel and parties to the conflict. 
Accountability 
.. Implementation of a collective accountability mechanism for affected populations; 
.. Review of the strategy for the centrality of protection and implementation of an action 
plan. 
.. Operationalization of inter-agency guidelines on prevention and response to genderbased 
violence, as well as protection in all sectors of the response; 
.. Follow-up of the collective action plan to prevent and respond to cases of sexual 
exploitation and abuse affecting humanitarian staff. 
CONTACT 
PERRIN Karen 
OCHA Office 
Manager 
perrink@un.org 

58 
PARTIE II: REFUGEES 
PEOPLE IN NEED REFUGEES 
71,859 
REQUIREMENTS (US$) 
22.9M 
TARGETED PEOPLE 
71,859 
# OF PARTNERS 
8 
The Central African Republic (CAR) hosts 
6,859 refugees concentrated in Bangui, 
Pladama Ouaka and Obo. They come from 
16 different nationalities. Southern Sudanese 
refugees are the most numerous (2,498), 
followed by Congolese from Kinshasa (1,787), 
Chadians (1,709) and other nationalities. 
Women represent 50 per cent of the total 
population of refugees and asylum seekers. As 
for children they represent 50.6 per cent of 
the said population. To this must be added the 
presence of 575,322 Central African refugees 
in countries mainly in Cameroon, Chad, the 
Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) and the 
Republic of Congo. A fringe of these refugees 
has expressed their willingness to return to 
CAR. 
The majority of refugees and asylum seekers 
have been in CAR for a long time. Despite 
the political and security instability that CAR 
has experienced in recent years, many of 
them have developed resilience capacities. 
However, the multiple conflicts noted in 
CAR have weakened their individual and 
community recovery initiatives. Women and 
children have been the most affected by this 
situation. Indeed, women, most of whom 
are heads of households, have had difficulty 
finding livelihoods for their families as a 
result of insecurity. This has increased their 
vulnerability. Some have also been subjected 
to sexual violence. Access to basic social 
services (health and education) has been 
limited by the breakdown of the state and the 
limited resources allocated to UNHCR and 
its partners. Several children have seen their 
school cycle interrupted. This has increased 
their risk of being enrolled in armed groups or 
forced to work in artisanal mines. 
In this context of insecurity linked to the 
activism of armed groups, respect for refugee 
rights is a challenge. Indeed, the religious 
connotation of the armed conflict in CAR has 
put at risk of protection a significant part of 
the refugee population identifying themselves 
as either Muslim or Christian depending on 
their area of residence. The fact that they are 
foreigners has contributed in strengthening 
their stigmatization by some populations. 
In this situation, they are easily mistaken 
for scapegoats. Their freedom of movement 
has been severely restricted by the multiple 
illegal barriers erected by armed groups. 
Despite the identity documents they hold, 
refugees are raided to move around. Their 
quest for livelihoods beyond their residence 
area has thus been reduced. The absence of 
biometric travel documents as required by 
the International Civil Aviation Organization 
(ICAO) has also contributed in slowing the 
momentum of some refugees undertaking 
international travel to strengthen their trade 
initiatives. 
Insufficient resources have been a challenge 
for assistance to people with special needs, 
including the elderly, children at risk and 
vulnerable women whose survival depends 
solely on UNHCR's assistance. The same 
applies to the project for the empowerment 
and local integration of refugees initiated by 
the CAR government, whose funding has 
been hampered by budgetary constraints. 
While continuing to ensure legal protection 
and provide a minimum package of assistance 
to refugees, particularly the most vulnerable, 
emphasis will be laid on sustainable solutions 
for refugees in accordance with the national 
strategy for sustainable solutions and the 
RCPA, whose strategic objective 4 of 
pillar I is devoted to supporting the return 
of refugees and sustainable solutions for 
internally displaced persons. A focus will be 
on voluntary repatriation and local integration 
of refugees. 
With regard to voluntary repatriation, it 
should be noted that approximately 65,000 
Central African refugees residing abroad will 
be voluntarily repatriated to CAR, including 
25,000 with the facilitation of UNHCR. They 
will mainly come from the Republic of Congo, 
the DRC and Cameroon. A return package 
will be provided as well as a kit to facilitate 
their reintegration. This kit includes a shelter 
component, reintegration activities such 
as the construction/rehabilitation of basic 
community social facilities (schools, health 
centers, markets, water points, etc.) in areas of 
return and the financing of income-generating 
activities (IGAs) to facilitate their community 
recovery and other vocational training. This 
assistance will mainly be provided through the 
CBI approach. 
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVE 1 : 
1Maintain a favourable 
protection environment 
and improve the response 
capacities of national authorities 
aiming to save lives and provide 
a level of protection in line 
with international standards 
by maintaining open access to 
territory and asylum procedures. 
SUPPORT FOR SO1 ,SO2 
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVE 3 : 
3Facilitate the local 
integration process in CAR of 
long-term refugees. 
SUPPORT FOR SO1 , SO2 , 
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVE 2 : 
2Ensure assistance and 
improve access to basic 
social services for refugees 
and asylum seekers 
SUPPORT FOR SO1 , SO3

59 
PARTIE II: REFUGEES 
CONTACT 
Cluster Coordinator: : 
George-Patrick 
MENZE 
Assistant 
Representative 
(Operations/UNHCR) 
Email : menze@unhcr. 
org 
BREAKDOWN OF PEOPLE IN NEED AND TARGETED BY STATUS, SEX AND AGE 
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVE 4 : 
4Facilitate the voluntary 
repatriation to CAR of Central 
African refugees residing 
abroad 
SUPPORT FOR SO1 , SO2 , 
Interventions in the framework of voluntary repatriation are coordinated by the Working Group 
on Sustainable Solutions (WGSD), which includes government actors (National Commission 
for Refugees and the Reintegration Support Project), United Nations agencies and humanitarian 
actors. To make refugee return sustainable, it is a must that the various actors operate in the 
areas of return in their respective areas (health and nutrition, education, food security, child 
protection, shelter, water, hygiene and sanitation, reproductive health, etc.). As areas of return 
face a critical infrastructure deficit, the intervention of development actors is required to ensure 
the stabilization and recovery of these areas, which are currently concentrated in the western 
part of the country. 
Local integration is divided into two components: building the socioeconomic capacities of 
refugees in order to reduce their dependence on UNHCR assistance and legal integration, the 
purpose of which is to terminate their refugee status either by granting a residence permit or by 
naturalization. The building of their socio-economic capacities is done through the financing of 
community or individual IGAs. This support, which is closely monitored, is provided in cash. 
The success of these initiatives can only be guaranteed if they are part of a recovery plan financed 
by development actors with financial institutions whose funds are larger and more sustainable. 
The process of legal integration is implemented by the CNR, which coordinates the action of 
various state services. Significant resources are required to ensure that the various steps are 
completed. 
Until the refugees are independent, they will be provided with minimal assistance, especially 
to the most vulnerable. This assistance aims to cover their basic needs in the areas of health, 
housing, education and food. In order to preserve their dignity, this assistance is granted to them 
according to the cash approach. 
To ensure the accountability of UNHCR and its partners to beneficiaries, regular consultations 
are organized in the form of participatory age, gender and diversity (AGDM) assessments. The 
results of these consultations are discussed with the latter in order to identify priorities aligned 
with available resources. These are integrated into the project programming. Close monitoring 
and regular evaluation are carried out each year with their participation. 
0.07M 51% 
0.07M 51% 
0.07M** 51% 
0.07M 51% 
0.07M 51% 
0.07M 51% 
$5M 
$22.9M 
$25.2M 
50 | 46| 4% 
50 | 46 | 4% 
50 | 46 | 4% 
50 | 46| 4% 
50 | 46 | 4% 
50 | 46 | 4% 
FOOD SECURITY 
TOTAL 
Refugees 
& 
returnees 
% female Refugees 
& 
returnees 
REQUIRED 
FUNDS 
PEOPLE IN NEED TARGETED PEOPLE $$ 
% children, 
adults, elderly 
people* 
% female % children, 
adults, elderly 
people* 
*Children (<18 years), adults (18-59 
years), Elderly people (>59 years) 
**The total is not the total of the column, 
since the same people can appear 
several times 
NON SECTORAL 
RESPONSE FOR 
REFUGEES

CONTRIBUTETO 
THE 
HUMANITARIAN 
RESPONSE 
PLAN 
To see the overview of 
humanitarian needs, the 
humanitarian response plan and 
country monitoring reports, 
and to give directly to the 
organizations participating in the 
plan, please visit: 
www.humanitarian 
response.info/ 
operations/centralafrican-
republic 
DONATE THROUGH 
THE CENTRAL 
EMERGENCY 
RESPONSE FUND (CERF) 
CERF provides rapid initial 
funding for vital actions in 
emerging emergencies and 
for essential and underfunded 
humanitarian operations in 
prolonged crises. CERF, managed 
by OCHA, receives contributions 
from various donors - mainly 
governments, but also private 
companies, foundations, charities 
and individuals - gathered in a 
single fund. It is used for crises 
all over the world. To learn more 
about CERF and how to donate, 
visit the website: 
www.unocha.org/cerf/ourdonors/
how-donate 
DONATE 
THROUGH THE 
COUNTRY’S 
HUMANITARIAN FUND 
The humanitarian fund for 
CAR is a common fund based 
in the country (CBPF). CBPFs 
are multi-donor humanitarian 
funding instruments established 
by the Emergency Relief 
Coordinator (ERC), and managed 
by OCHA at the country level 
under the direction of the 
Humanitarian Coordinator (HC). 
To learn more about CERF, visit 
the website: 
www.unocha.org/what-wedo/
humanitarian-financing/ 
country-based-pooledfunds 
To learn how to make a 
contribution, please contact: 
chfcar@un.org 
EMERGENCY AID IN-KIND 
The United Nations encourages donors to make contributions in cash, rather than in kind, for maximum 
speed and flexibility, as well as to ensure that the most urgent humanitarian goods are delivered. In the event 
that you can only make contributions in kind, in response to disasters and emergencies, please contact : 
logik@un.org 
HRP 
REGISTERING YOUR CONTRIBUTIONS 
OCHA manages the Financial Tracking Service (FTS), which records all reported humanitarian contributions 
(cash, in-kind, multilateral and bilateral). Its purpose is to give credit and visibility to donors for 
their generosity, and to show the total amount of funding as well as gaps in humanitarian plans. Please 
report your contributions to FTS either by email to fts@un.org or through the online contribution form at 
http://fts.unocha.org 
DONOR GUIDE 

61 
PARTIE I: RESPONSE MONITORING 
PART III: ANNEXES 

62 
PARTIE III - ANNEXES: OBJECTIVES, INDICATORS & TARGETS 
OBJECTIVES, INDICATORS & TARGETS 
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES INDICATORS AND TARGETS 
Strategic Objective 1 (SO1): Save lives 
INDICATOR NEED BASELINE TARGET 
# of people affected (disaggregated by gender and age) 
having benefited from temporary water to respond to their 
vulnerability(ies) 
964,606 323,000 771,224 
# of targeted children (girls and boys) from 6 to 59 months 
affected by severe acute malnutrition (SAM) admitted to 
therapeutic nutritional programs 
38,213 - 30,570 
# of children from 6 - 59 months (disaggregated by gender) 
vaccinated against measles 
28,000 0 26 600 
# of people (disaggregated by gender) affected having 
received food assistance 
600 000 - 600,000 
# of GBV survivors (women, men, girls, boys) having received 
care according to a multisectoral approach 
11,300 57,33 (January-August 2018/ 
GBVIMS) 
11,300 
# of SEA survivors (women, men, girls, boys) having received 
care through a multisectoral approach 
ND - 200 
# of out-of-school children (disaggregated by gender) who 
have benefited from educational opportunities through 
Stages and host schools 
351,000 79,741 160,000 
Strategic Objective 2 (SO2): Respect Basic Rights 
INDICATOR NEED BASELINE TARGET 
% of HLP conflicts registered and solved 40 40 
% of children (girls and boys) exiting armed forces and 
groups having have benefited from community social 
reintegration programs 
30% 60% 
# of victims of incidents having benefited from multisectoral 
care 
0 
% of clusters having an action plan on PT 100% 100% 
% of partners from all clusters who participated in the 
collective feedback collection service and took corrective 
measures in the planning or implementation of programs 
50% 
% of GBV survivors (women, men, girls, boys) having received 
legal and judicial care 
19% 30% 
# of complaint community mechanisms on functional SEAs 73 15 28 
# of attacks on schools/ education system documented by 
the cluster 
NA 28 
# of attacks on the checked health system disaggregated by 
type 
NA 32 200 

63 
PARTIE III - ANNEXES: OBJECTIVES, INDICATORS & TARGETS 
Support for SO1 , 
Support for SO1 , 
Strategic Objective 3 (SO3): Preserve Human Dignity 
INDICATOR NEED BASELINE TARGET 
# of households (disaggregated by gender of head of 
household) having been assisted in the rehabilitation of their 
temporary shelter, disaggregated by type of assistance 
10,000 3,000 
# of learners (% girls and boys) receiving education adapted 
to psychosocial needs 
1,282,000 NA 600,000 
# of people engaged in income-generating activities (% male/ 
female) 
22,225 32,096 
# of deliveries assisted by qualified personnel 27,200 NA =16,320 
CLUSTER OBJECTIVES, INDICATORS AND TARGETS 
Shelter/NFI/CCCM Objective 1: Ensure that the affected and vulnerable population has access to 
basic non-food items while promoting self-sufficiency and existing coping strategies 
INDICATOR NEED 
BASELINE TARGET 
DISAGGREGATED TARGET 
ADULTS (19-59 
YEARS) 
CHILDREN (0-18 
YEARS) 
ELDERLY PEOPLE 
(>=60YEARS) 
NB OF MEN NB OF 
WOMEN 
NB OF 
BOYS 
NB OF 
GIRLS 
NB OF 
MEN 
NB OF 
WOMEN 
# of households (disaggregated by gender of head 
of household) having benefitted from basic non-food 
items, disaggregated by type of distribution 
93,376 90,000 21,168 22,932 19,458 21,942 
2,070 
2,430 
# of households (disaggregated by gender of head 
the household) having benefitted from NFI distribution 
75,000 36,000 39,000 
# of households (disaggregated by gender of the head 
of household) having benefitted from NFI fairs 
10,000 4,800 5,200 
# of households (disaggregated by gender of the head 
of household) having received a cash transfer (CASH) 
5,000 2,400 2,600 
Shelter/NFI/CCCM Objective 2: Ensure shelter for the affected population to protect them from the 
elements and contribute to their safety, dignity and well-being 
INDICATOR NEED BASELINE TARGET 
DISAGGREGATED TARGET 
ADULTS (19-59 YEARS) CHILDREN (0-18 
YEARS) 
ELDERLY PEOPLE 
(>=60YEARS) 
NB OF MEN NB OF 
WOMEN 
NB OF 
BOYS 
NB OF 
GIRLS 
NB OF MEN NB OF 
WOMEN 
# of affected households (disaggregated by 
gender of the head of household) having received 
emergency shelter 
93,376 75,045 36,022 39,023 
# of households (disaggregated by gender of the 
head of household) having received emergency 
family shelters 
75,000 36,000 39,000 
# of households (disaggregated by gender of 
the head of household) that have benefited from 
community emergency shelters 
45 22 23 

64 
PARTIE III - ANNEXES: OBJECTIVES, INDICATORS & TARGETS 
Support for SO3 
Support for SO2 
Support for SO1 , 
Shelter/NFI/CCCM Objective 3: Ensure that the affected population has access to temporary 
shelter solutions and a minimum basic social service. 
INDICATOR NEED BASELINE TARGET 
DISAGGREGATED TARGET 
ADULTS (19-59 YEARS) CHILDREN (0-18 
YEARS) 
ELDERLY PEOPLE 
(>=60YEARS) 
NB OF MEN NB OF 
WOMEN 
NB OF 
BOYS 
NB OF 
GIRLS 
NB OF MEN NB OF 
WOMEN 
# of households (disaggregated by gender of 
head of household) having been assisted in 
the rehabilitation of their temporary shelter, 
disaggregated by type of assistance 
10,000 3,000 1,440 1,560 - - 
Shelter/NFI/CCCM Objective 4: Ensure protection and assistance to the affected population in the 
sites and in host families through the appropriate mechanisms and tools of the CCCM 
INDICATOR NEED BASELINE TARGET 
DISAGGREGATED TARGET 
ADULTS (19-59 YEARS) CHILDREN (0-18 
YEARS) 
ELDERLY PEOPLE 
(>=60YEARS) 
NB OF MEN NB OF 
WOMEN 
NB OF 
BOYS 
NB OF 
GIRLS 
NB OF MEN NB OF 
WOMEN 
# of coordination and multisectoral meetings 
organized 
396 
# of people living in IDP sites (disaggregated by 
gender of the head of household) having access 
to at least one basic minimum service (WASH, 
health and protection) 
241,044 191,380 43,325 45,093 47,263 49,192 3 188 3,319 
# of complaint mechanisms set up in the sites 
with a manager 
33 
# of people (disaggregated by gender) having 
received training in site coordination and 
management 
330 198 132 
# of people (disaggregated by gender) having 
received training as part of population movement 
monitoring 
420 202 218 
# of profiled off-site people 176,755 130,776 29 605 30,813 32,296 33,615 2,179 2,268 
WASH Objective 1: Provide emergency WASH assistance according to cluster standards to 
affected populations following a shock 
INDICATOR NEED BASELINE TARGET 
DISAGGREGATED TARGET 
ADULTS (19-59 YEARS) CHILDREN (0-18 
YEARS) 
ELDERLY PEOPLE 
(>=60YEARS) 
NB OF MEN NB OF 
WOMEN 
NB OF 
BOYS 
NB OF 
GIRLS 
NB OF MEN NB OF 
WOMEN 
# of people affected (disaggregated by gender 
and age) having benefited from temporary water 
to respond to their vulnerability(ies) 
964 606 323 000 771 224 158 718 165 196 204 066 212 395 15 116 15 733 
# of affected people (disaggregated by gender 
and age) having received adequate sanitation to 
respond their vulnerability(ies) 
428 934 334 000 428 934 88 275 91 878 113 496 118 128 8 407 8 750 

65 
PARTIE III - ANNEXES: OBJECTIVES, INDICATORS & TARGETS 
Support for SO2 
INDICATOR NEED BASELINE TARGET 
DISAGGREGATED TARGET 
ADULTS (19-59 YEARS) CHILDREN (0-18 
YEARS) 
ELDERLY PEOPLE 
(>=60YEARS) 
NB OF MEN NB OF 
WOMEN 
NB OF 
BOYS 
NB OF 
GIRLS 
NB OF MEN NB OF 
WOMEN 
# of affected people (disaggregated by gender 
and age) who have benefited from hygiene kits 
according to the standards of the WASH cluster, 
accompanied by awareness-raising 
428,934 168,000 428 934 88,275 91,878 
# of affected people (disaggregated by gender 
and age) who have benefited from dignity kits 
according to the standards of the WASH Cluster 
accompanied by awareness raising 
210,006 168,000 210,006 - 91,878 - 118,128 - - 
# of affected people (disaggregated by gender 
and age) with access to hand-washing points 
according to WASH cluster standards with 
awareness raising 
1,360,000 155,000 2,148,800 666,400 693,600 359 856 374 544 26 656 27,744 
# of affected people (disaggregated by gender 
and age) who have access to a shower according 
to WASH Cluster standards with awareness raising 
428,934 325,000 677,715 210,178 218,756 113,496 118,128 8,407 8,750 
# of health facilities (FOSA) integrating nutritional 
and outpatient therapeutic units (UNTA) benefiting 
from the minimum WASH package according to 
cluster standards 
15,000 - - - - - - 
# of schoolchildren benefiting from the minimum 
WASH package in schools according to cluster 
standards 
7,000 
# of health facilities made operational in areas 
of chronic vulnerability and return benefiting from 
the minimum WASH package according to cluster 
standards 
39,000 - - - - - - 
Ensure secure access to WASH services according to cluster standards (quality) while respecting 
the minimum 5 cluster commitments 
INDICATOR NEED BASELINE TARGET 
DISAGGREGATED TARGET 
ADULTS (19-59 YEARS) CHILDREN (0-18 
YEARS) 
ELDERLY PEOPLE 
(>=60YEARS) 
NB OF MEN NB OF 
WOMEN 
NB OF 
BOYS 
NB OF 
GIRLS 
NB OF MEN NB OF 
WOMEN 
# of affected people (disaggregated by 
gender and age) who have been sensitized 
on basic hygiene concepts (including hand 
washing with disinfectant) 
1,360,000 385,000 1,360,000 279,888 291 312 359,856 374,544 26,656 27,744 
# of water points equipped with an animal 
drinking device in transhumance or tension/ 
pressure areas around the water resource 
934,000 - 934,026 211,440 220,070 230,672 240,088 15,560 16,196 
# of affected women and girls with access 
to a space dedicated to menstrual hygiene 
management 
210,006 325,000 210,006 - 91,878 - 118,128 - - 

66 
PARTIE III - ANNEXES: OBJECTIVES, INDICATORS & TARGETS 
WASH Objective 3 : Restore secure access to WASH services from essential services in the most 
vulnerable areas 
INDICATOR NEED BASELINE TARGET 
DISAGGREGATED TARGET 
ADULTS (19-59 YEARS) CHILDREN (0-18 
YEARS) 
ELDERLY PEOPLE 
(>=60YEARS) 
NB OF MEN NB OF 
WOMEN 
NB OF 
BOYS 
NB OF 
GIRLS 
NB OF MEN NB OF 
WOMEN 
# of management committees (COGES) set 
up taking into account the 5 commitments of 
the WASH cluster 
1,702 54,000 - - - - - - - 
# of affected people (disaggregated by 
gender and age) having received sustainable 
access to safe drinking water to address their 
vulnerability(ies) 
851,081 452,000 851,081 175,152 182,302 225,196 234 388 16,681 17,362 
#of people having received cash assistance 29,152 29,152 
Education Objective 1 : Ensure the survival of girls and boys (3-18 years) affected by the crisis 
through equitable access to healthy and safe learning environments 
INDICATOR NEED BASELINE TARGET 
DISAGGREGATED TARGET 
ADULTS (19-59 YEARS) CHILDREN (0-18 
YEARS) 
ELDERLY PEOPLE 
(>=60YEARS) 
NB OF MEN NB OF 
WOMEN 
NB OF 
BOYS 
NB OF 
GIRLS 
NB OF MEN NB OF 
WOMEN 
# of out-of-school children (disaggregated by 
gender) who have benefited from educational 
opportunities through Stages and host 
schools 
143,910 79,741 160,000 80,000 80,000 
# of learners (% girls and boys) having 
benefited from school materials distributed by 
humanitarian actors 
1,282,000 112,879 590,000 295,000 295,000 
% of affected students (disaggregated by 
gender) reintegrated into the formal education 
system after catch-up, remedial courses or an 
accelerated education program 
NA 80% 
% of teachers/parent teachers (% men and 
women) who teach using the teaching kits 
distributed 
18,000 NA 5,000 5,000 
# of teachers and/or parent teachers (% 
men and women) having received training/ 
retraining in basic pedagogy; education 
in emergencies; remedial courses and 
multigrade classes; non-formal education; 
management of large groups and conflict 
sensitivity 
18,000 NA 5,000 5,000 - - - - 
% of teachers/parent teachers (% men and 
women) who regularly receive incentive 
payments (12 months 
18 000 NA 5,000 5,000 
# of affected people (disaggregated by gender 
and age) having been sensitized on children's 
rights to education 
2,564,000 NA 12,000 6,000 6,000 - - 
# of affected students (disaggregated by 
gender and age) who have benefited from the 
school canteen 
425,520 NA 162,000 81,000 81,000 
Support for SO1 
Support for SO3 

67 
PARTIE III - ANNEXES: OBJECTIVES, INDICATORS & TARGETS 
Support for SO3 
Support for SO3 
Education Objective 2 : Strengthen the protection of out-of-school girls and boys (3-18 years) in 
crisis areas through access to quality alternative education relevant to needs 
INDICATOR NEED BASELINE TARGET 
DISAGGREGATED TARGET 
ADULTS (19-59 YEARS) CHILDREN (0-18 
YEARS) 
ELDERLY PEOPLE 
(>=60YEARS) 
NB OF MEN NB OF 
WOMEN 
NB OF 
BOYS 
NB OF 
GIRLS 
NB OF MEN NB OF 
WOMEN 
# of adolescents (disaggregated by gender) 
who have received literacy and life skills 
training 
250,598 7,780 62,000 31,000 31,000 
# of adolescents (disaggregated by gender) 
who have received vocational training 
250,598 1,370 4,000 2,000 2,000 
Education Objective 3 : Protect the rights of affected girls and boys in crisis areas against 
immediate and future threats, through access to peace education and strengthening psychosocial 
adaptation 
INDICATOR NEED BASELINE TARGET 
DISAGGREGATED TARGET 
ADULTS (19-59 YEARS) CHILDREN (0-18 
YEARS) 
ELDERLY PEOPLE 
(>=60YEARS) 
NB OF MEN NB OF 
WOMEN 
NB OF 
BOYS 
NB OF 
GIRLS 
NB OF MEN NB OF 
WOMEN 
# of attacks on schools/education system 
documented by the cluster 
ND 28 - - - - - - 
# of learners (% girls and boys) receiving 
education adapted to psychosocial needs 
1,282,000 ND 600,000 - - 300,000 300,000 - - 
# of community committees with a plan to 
protect school spaces 
3,205 ND 500 - - - - - - 
Logistics Objective 1: Improve the logistics operations of the humanitarian community through 
common services in the main areas of the country 
INDICATOR NEED BASELINE TARGET 
# of m3 of stored inputs - 16,200 
# of temperature-controlled storage facilities set up - 1 
# of MT of cargo transported by land - 1,200 
# of MT of cargo transported by air - 360 
# of rubhalls established - 6 
Logistics Objective 2: Strengthen air transport of passengers and air freight for the humanitarian 
community in the main areas of the country 
INDICATOR NEED BASELINE TARGET 
# of passengers having been transported by humanitarian aircraft - 20,000 
Support for SO1 
Support for SO1 

68 
PARTIE III - ANNEXES: OBJECTIVES, INDICATORS & TARGETS 
Logistics Objective 3: Facilitate physical access through projects to rehabilitate infrastructure and 
artworks 
INDICATOR NEED BASELINE TARGET 
# of facilities having been rehabilitated - 35 
MSSC Objective 1 : Support the rebuilding of livelihoods for affected and at-risk populations 
INDICATOR NEED BASELINE TARGET 
DISAGGREGATED TARGET 
ADULTS (19-59 YEARS) CHILDREN (0-18 
YEARS) 
ELDERLY PEOPLE 
(>=60YEARS) 
NB OF MEN NB OF 
WOMEN 
NB OF 
BOYS 
NB OF 
GIRLS 
NB OF MEN NB OF 
WOMEN 
# of people (men/women) with access to 
Labor Intensive Work (LIW) 
23,588 23,588 64,194 29,882 31,102 - - 1,573 1,637 
# of people engaged in income-generating 
activities (men/women) 
22,225 22,225 32,096 14,941 15,551 - - 786 818 
MSSC Objective 2 : Strengthen the empowerment of affected and at-risk populations 
INDICATOR NEED BASELINE TARGET 
DISAGGREGATED TARGET 
ADULTS (19-59 YEARS) CHILDREN (0-18 
YEARS) 
ELDERLY PEOPLE 
(>=60YEARS) 
NB OF MEN NB OF 
WOMEN 
NB OF 
BOYS 
NB OF 
GIRLS 
NB OF MEN NB OF 
WOMEN 
# of village savings and loan associations 
(VSLA) created or supported 
265 265 480 - - - - - - 
# of people (men/women) who have 
completed vocational training 
4,622 4,622 16,048 7,471 7,775 - - 393 409 
# of people (men/women) with access to 
integrated assistance initiatives that use 
cash/coupon transfers 
7,574 7,574 16,048 7,471 7,775 - - 393 409 
MSSC Objective 3 : Support coordination and promote living together and community conflicts 
management 
INDICATOR NEED BASELINE TARGET 
DISAGGREGATED TARGET 
ADULTS (19-59 YEARS) CHILDREN (0-18 
YEARS) 
ELDERLY PEOPLE 
(>=60YEARS) 
NB OF MEN NB OF 
WOMEN 
NB OF 
BOYS 
NB OF 
GIRLS 
NB OF MEN NB OF 
WOMEN 
# of information or awareness campaigns on 
social cohesion 
21 21 30 - - - - - - 
# of mechanisms to support conflict 
management at the community level that are 
revitalized and equitably integrated for both 
men and women 
36 36 80 - - - - - - 
Support for SO2 
Support for SO3 
Support for SO3 
Support for SO1 

69 
PARTIE III - ANNEXES: OBJECTIVES, INDICATORS & TARGETS 
Support for SO3 
Support for SO1 
Nutrition Objective 1: Provide equitable access to life-saving interventions by treating acute 
malnutrition in at least 80% of expected cases. 
INDICATOR NEED BASELINE TARGET 
DISAGGREGATED TARGET 
ADULTS (19-59 YEARS) CHILDREN (0-18 
YEARS) 
ELDERLY PEOPLE 
(>=60YEARS) 
NB OF MEN NB OF 
WOMEN 
NB OF 
BOYS 
NB OF 
GIRLS 
NB OF MEN NB OF 
WOMEN 
# of children (girls and boys) from 6 to 59 
months targeted affected by severe acute 
malnutrition (SAM) admitted to therapeutic 
nutritional programs 
38,213 - 30,570 - - 14,674 15,896 - - 
# of children (girls and boys) aged 6 to 59 
months with moderate acute malnutrition 
(MAM) admitted to therapeutic and 
complementary feeding programs 
51,756 - 41,405 - - 19,874 21,531 - - 
# of children (girls and boys) aged 0-59 
months screened 
933,142 - 746,514 - - 358,327 388,187 - - 
# of care supporters of severely acutely 
malnourished children with medical 
complications in assisted UNT (CASH transfer 
approach) 
5,732 - 5,732 2,751 2,981 
# of assisted PWIH 10,000 - 7,950 - - 3,816 4,134 - - 
# of functional FOSA integrating nutritional 
and outpatient therapeutic units (UNTA) 
555 435 - - - - - - - 
# of hospitals with functional therapeutic 
units (UNTs) 
50 46 - - - - - - - 
# of health providers trained in the integrated 
management of PECIMA at district level 
1,200 230 1,200 576 624 - - - - 
# of COREs trained on screening and referrals 
at district level 
1,200 400 1,200 576 624 - - - - 
Nutrition Objective 2: Prevent deterioration in nutritional status in at least 80% of expected cases. 
INDICATOR NEED BASELINE TARGET 
DISAGGREGATED TARGET 
ADULTS (19-59 YEARS) CHILDREN (0-18 
YEARS) 
ELDERLY PEOPLE 
(>=60YEARS) 
NB OF MEN NB OF 
WOMEN 
NB OF 
BOYS 
NB OF 
GIRLS 
NB OF MEN NB OF 
WOMEN 
# of children aged 6 to 23 months 
(disaggregated by gender) admitted to 
the BSFP (Blanket Supplementary Feeding 
Programs) 
236,576 25,000 189,261 - - 90,845 98,416 - - 
# of FE/FA and accompanying persons aware 
of the IYCF 
277,976 - 71,975 - 71,975 - - - - 
# of community relays trained on appropriate 
IYCF practices 
1,200 400 1,200 576 624 - - - - 
# of health providers trained in appropriate 
IYCF practices 
1,200 230 1,200 576 624 - - - - 
# of children 6-59 months (disaggregated 
by gender) who received vitamin A 
supplementation 
622,154 - 488,923 - - 234,683 254,240 - - 
# of children 12-59 months (disaggregated by 
gender) who have been dewormed 
544,124 - 435,299 - - 208,944 226,355 - - 

70 
PARTIE III - ANNEXES: OBJECTIVES, INDICATORS & TARGETS 
INDICATOR NEED BASELINE TARGET 
DISAGGREGATED TARGET 
ADULTS (19-59 YEARS) CHILDREN (0-18 
YEARS) 
ELDERLY PEOPLE 
(>=60YEARS) 
NB OF MEN NB OF 
WOMEN 
NB OF 
BOYS 
NB OF 
GIRLS 
NB OF MEN NB OF 
WOMEN 
# of FE/FAs having received micronutrient 
supplementation with sufficient iron 
277,976 - 71,975 - 71,975 - - - - 
Nutrition Objective 3 : Improve the care of acute malnourished children through coordination, 
monitoring and evaluation of actions. 
INDICATOR NEED BASELINE TARGET 
DISAGGREGATED TARGET 
ADULTS (19-59 YEARS) CHILDREN (0-18 
YEARS) 
ELDERLY PEOPLE 
(>=60YEARS) 
NB OF MEN NB OF 
WOMEN 
NB OF 
BOYS 
NB OF 
GIRLS 
NB OF MEN NB OF 
WOMEN 
# of assessments before and after the care 
provided by the cluster partners at the level of 
FOSAs, TSLCP or displaced persons' sites 
236 576 25 000 189 261 - - 90 845 98 416 - - 
% of feedback/complaints collected through 
post-care assessments carried out by cluster 
partners at the level of FOSAs, TSLCP or 
displaced persons' sites 
277 976 - 71 975 - 71 975 - - - - 
% of partners who organized separate focus 
groups for men, women and girls 
1 200 400 1 200 576 624 - - - - 
# of training on sexual abuse, the integration 
of cross-cutting protection and accountability 
in the humanitarian response 
1 200 230 1 200 576 624 - - - - 
# of monitoring and early warning sites 
established 
622 154 - 488 923 - - 234 683 254 240 - - 
Nutrition cluster coordination is maintained 544 124 - 435 299 - - 208 944 226 355 - - 
# of rapid SMART surveys conducted 277 976 - 71 975 - 71 975 - - - - 
Protection Objective 1 : Strengthen the protection of populations affected by the conflict through 
the reduction of aggravating factors, including violations of dignity and physical and moral integrity 
INDICATOR NEED BASELINE TARGET 
DISAGGREGATED TARGET 
ADULTS (19-59 YEARS) CHILDREN (0-18 
YEARS) 
ELDERLY PEOPLE 
(>=60YEARS) 
NB OF MEN NB OF 
WOMEN 
NB OF 
BOYS 
NB OF 
GIRLS 
NB OF MEN NB OF 
WOMEN 
# Number of protection incidents collected 
and verified disaggregated by typology 
- - - - - - - - - 
# of priority sub-prefectures covered by 
protection monitoring 
40 31 900,000 202,860 211,140 220,500 229,500 17,640 18,360 
% of people (disaggregated by age and 
gender) with special needs who received care 
- - - - - - 
% of clusters having an action plan on PT - - - - - - 
# of security audits conducted with 
recommendations to mitigate risks 
27 19 - - - - - - 
GBV 
Support for SO3 
Support for SO1 

71 
PARTIE III - ANNEXES: OBJECTIVES, INDICATORS & TARGETS 
INDICATOR NEED BASELINE TARGET 
DISAGGREGATED TARGET 
ADULTS (19-59 YEARS) CHILDREN (0-18 
YEARS) 
ELDERLY PEOPLE 
(>=60YEARS) 
NB OF MEN NB OF 
WOMEN 
NB OF 
BOYS 
NB OF 
GIRLS 
NB OF MEN NB OF 
WOMEN 
# (disaggregated by gender) of people 
sensitized about GBV and related care 
services 
500,000 171500 178500 73500 76500 
# of harmonized communication and 
information tools in Sango and French used by 
GBV/SEA/CP actors 
6 2 (SEA 
principles 
translated 
into Sango 
and reporting 
diagram) 
57,500 - - - - - - 
# of vulnerable women and girls having 
received dignity kits 
115,000 10,533 130,000 - 57,500 - 57,500 - - 
# of safe and functional spaces for women 
and girls 
50 8 - - - - - - 
# of clusters with an operational GBV action 
plan 
11 5 with action 
plans (CCCM, 
health, 
nutrition, 
livelihoods, 
protection) 
11 - - - - - - 
SEA 
# disaggregated of focal points trained on 
SEA protection and the related reporting 
mechanism in CAR 
300 - 300 150 150 - - - - 
# (disaggregated) of humanitarian staff 
sensitized on protection against SEA and the 
reporting mechanism in CAR 
3,500 3,500 1,750 1,750 - - - - 
CHILD PROTECTION 
Ensure the prevention of family separations 
and child recruitment (no indicators for this 
activity) 
10,082 - 10,082 - - 5,041 5,041 - - 
HLP 
# disaggregated of key persons trained in 
mediation 
6,000 4,000 1,500 1,500 1,000 1,000 500 500 
# of people (disaggregated by gender) 
affected by HLP conflict prevention and land 
tenure activities 
12,000 - 12,000 4,720 7,080 - - 80 120 
Protection Objective 2 : Ensure access for affected populations to life-saving integrated assistance 
INDICATOR NEED BASELINE TARGET 
DISAGGREGATED TARGET 
ADULTS (19-59 YEARS) CHILDREN (0-18 
YEARS) 
ELDERLY PEOPLE 
(>=60YEARS) 
NB OF MEN NB OF 
WOMEN 
NB OF 
BOYS 
NB OF 
GIRLS 
NB OF MEN NB OF 
WOMEN 
% of cases received that have been resolved 
in accordance with relevant international law 
and standards 
- - - - - - 
# of victims of incidents having benefited 
from multisectoral care 
- - - - - - 
# of conflict resolution processes and 
community safety plans supported by people 
trained in mediation 
100 25 10 - - 50 15 
HLP 
Support for SO2 

72 
PARTIE III - ANNEXES: OBJECTIVES, INDICATORS & TARGETS 
INDICATOR NEED BASELINE TARGET 
DISAGGREGATED TARGET 
ADULTS (19-59 YEARS) CHILDREN (0-18 
YEARS) 
ELDERLY PEOPLE 
(>=60YEARS) 
NB OF MEN NB OF 
WOMEN 
NB OF 
BOYS 
NB OF 
GIRLS 
NB OF MEN NB OF 
WOMEN 
# of mechanisms for managing conflicts 
related to HLPs and functional land 
20 - - - - - - - 
% of HLP conflicts registered and solved 40 40 20 20 - - - - 
CHILD PROTECTION 
# of unaccompanied minors (G/B) reunited 
with their biological families 
4,352 1,036 4,352 - - 2,176 2,176 - - 
# of children (G/B) exiting armed forces and 
groups having benefited from community 
social reintegration programs 
5,550 3,411 5,550 - - 3,700 1,850 - - 
# of children (G/B) who have received a birth 
certificate 
150,000 - 150,000 - - 75,000 75,000 - - 
# of girls and boys receiving psychosocial 
support through child-friendly spaces/ 
children's clubs 
356,180 90,156 145,000 - - 72,500 72,500 - - 
GBV/PSEA 
# of service providers trained in psychosocial 
management of GBV/SEA cases 
108 108 43 65 - - - - 
# of service providers trained on legal 
assistance for survivors 
60 60 - - - - - - 
# of actors in the judicial chain trained in the 
handling of GBV/SEA-related complaints 
225 120 - - 
# of GBV survivors (women, men, girls, 
boys) having received care according to a 
multisectoral approach 
11,300 5,733 
(January- 
August 2018/ 
GBVIMS 
11,300 - - - - - - 
# of rape survivors (women, men, girls, boys) 
having received medical care 
5650 1024 5650 
# of SEA victims (women, men, girls, boys) 
having received assistance through a 
multisectoral approach 
200 - 200 - - - - - - 
% GBV survivors (women, men, girls, boys) 
having received legal and judicial assistance 
50% 
19% 30% 
# (disaggregated by gender) of victims of 
protection incidents referred by the green line 
- - - - - - - 
COORDINATION 
# of joint assessments conducted on 
protection needs and responses (Protection, 
GBV and CP) 
- - - - - - 
# of sub-prefectures for which quality GBV 
data are available 
Bangui and 
26 subprefectures 
- -- - - - 
# of support missions carried out for 
regional clusters 
- - - - - - - 
# of people dedicated to Protection/VBG/CP 
coordination and information management 
(IM reinforcement and coordination in the 
provinces) 
10 8 10 5 5 - - - - 

73 
PARTIE III - ANNEXES: OBJECTIVES, INDICATORS & TARGETS 
Support for SO3 
Support for SO1 
Protection Objective 3 : Contribute to the empowerment of affected populations through the 
strengthening of community-based protection mechanisms 
INDICATOR NEED BASELINE TARGET 
DISAGGREGATED TARGET 
ADULTS (19-59 YEARS) CHILDREN (0-18 
YEARS) 
ELDERLY PEOPLE 
(>=60YEARS) 
NB OF MEN NB OF 
WOMEN 
NB OF 
BOYS 
NB OF 
GIRLS 
NB OF MEN NB OF 
WOMEN 
# of intra- and/or inter-community conflicts 
resolved with the support of mediators 
- - - - - - 
# of community protection mechanisms for 
child protection and the fight against GBV/ 
SEA established/strengthened 
64 64 - - - - - - 
# of community complaint mechanisms on 
functional SEAs 
73 15 28 - - - - - - 
# people trained in conflict resolution 
mechanisms 
200 - - - - - - 
% of beneficiary households/persons are 
confident that community mechanisms will 
ensure their access to the HLP 
40 40 100 100 - - 50 50 
# of community leaders, local authorities 
and members of community mechanisms 
(disaggregated by gender) trained in 
collaborative HLP dispute resolution methods 
750 750 20 20 - - - - 
# of community leaders, local authorities 
and members of community mechanisms 
(disaggregated by gender) trained on land and 
agro-pastoral legislation 
250 250 600 150 - - - - 
# of local authorities heads of neighborhoods 
and villages (disaggregated by gender) trained 
on their roles and responsibilities 
500 500 200 50 - - - - 
# of services to support the mechanisms 
in the resolution of HLP and land conflicts 
issued 
50 400 100 - - - - 
Health Objective 1: Provide emergency health care to populations affected by a humanitarian shock 
INDICATOR NEED BASELINE TARGET 
DISAGGREGATED TARGET 
ADULTS (19-59 YEARS) CHILDREN (0-18 
YEARS) 
ELDERLY PEOPLE 
(>=60YEARS) 
NB OF MEN NB OF 
WOMEN 
NB OF 
BOYS 
NB OF 
GIRLS 
NB OF MEN NB OF 
WOMEN 
# of injured (disaggregated by gender and 
age group) cared for 
10,000 0 1,000 226 236 247 257 17 17 
# of children from 6 - 59 months 
(disaggregated by gender) vaccinated against 
measles 
28,000 0 26,600 - - 13034 13566 - - 
# of LLIN distributed in humanitarian shock 
areas 
80,000 0 76,000 ND ND ND ND ND ND 
# of curative consultations (disaggregated by 
gender and age group) 
80,000 0 80,000 18110 18850 19757 20563 1333 1387 
# of mental health consultations 
(disaggregated by gender and age group) 
2,000 0 1,000 226 236 247 257 17 17 
# of rape cases (disaggregated by gender and 
age group) treated within 72 hours 
NA 0 500 23 208 25 227 2 15 
# of female and male condoms distributed NA 0 30,000 12474 1386 1080 120 459 0

74 
PARTIE III - ANNEXES: OBJECTIVES, INDICATORS & TARGETS 
INDICATOR NEED BASELINE TARGET 
DISAGGREGATED TARGET 
ADULTS (19-59 YEARS) CHILDREN (0-18 
YEARS) 
ELDERLY PEOPLE 
(>=60YEARS) 
NB OF MEN NB OF 
WOMEN 
NB OF 
BOYS 
NB OF 
GIRLS 
NB OF MEN NB OF 
WOMEN 
# of individual delivery kits distributed to 
visibly pregnant women 
4,000 0 3,000 0 2880 0 120 0 0 
# of deliveries assisted by qualified staff in 
areas affected by a humanitarian shock 
NA 0 2,000 0 1920 0 80 0 0 
# of Caesarean sections performed in areas 
affected by a humanitarian shock 
NA 0 600 0 576 0 24 0 0 
# of secure blood bags distributed in areas 
affected by a humanitarian shock 
NA 0 500 113 118 123 129 8 9 
# of STI cases treated in areas affected by a 
humanitarian shock 
NA 0 500 231 240 10 10 4 4 
# of patients (disaggregated by gender and 
age group) referred from health centers/ 
stations to a Hospital 
NA 0 600 136 141 148 154 10 10 
# of patients on ARVs or anti-tuberculosis 
drugs lost, found and put back on treatment 
NA 0 200 45 47 49 51 3 3 
# of diabetics and hypertensives treated 
disaggregated by gender 
NA 0 500 162 168 10 10 74 77 
# of verified health system attacks 
disaggregated by type 
NA 32 200 - - - - - - 
Health Objective 2: Improve access to quality primary and secondary health care for the most 
vulnerable populations in areas of severity 2; 3; 4 and 5 and in areas of return 
INDICATOR NEED BASELINE TARGET 
DISAGGREGATED TARGET 
ADULTS (19-59 YEARS) CHILDREN (0-18 
YEARS) 
ELDERLY PEOPLE 
(>=60YEARS) 
NB OF MEN NB OF 
WOMEN 
NB OF 
BOYS 
NB OF 
GIRLS 
NB OF MEN NB OF 
WOMEN 
# curative consultations (disaggregated by 
gender and age group) in areas of return and 
severity level 3, 4, 5 
800,000 0 800,000 181104 188496 197568 205632 13328 13872 
# of health workers trained in reproductive 
health 
ND ND 400 - - - - - - 
# comprehensive reproductive health kits 
distributed 
ND ND 10 - - - - - - 
% of pregnant women who have completed 
their prenatal consultations according to 
standards 
ND 38% =50% - - - - - - 
# of deliveries assisted by qualified staff 27,200 ND =16,320 15,667 653 
# of qualified staff recruited and deployed in 
health facilities 
ND ND 100 - - - - - - 
# of caesarean sections performed ND ND 1100 - - - - - - 
# joint supervision missions carried out by 
the partners of the health cluster 
30 - - - - - - 
# of cases of mental disorders 
(disaggregated by gender and age group) 
treated 
ND ND 2,000 453 471 494 514 33 35 
# of patients (disaggregated by gender and 
age group) referred from health centers/ 
stations to a Hospital 
ND ND 3,000 679 707 741 771 50 52 
Support for SO1 .SO3 

75 
PARTIE III - ANNEXES: OBJECTIVES, INDICATORS & TARGETS 
Support for SO1 .SO3 
INDICATOR NEED BASELINE TARGET 
DISAGGREGATED TARGET 
ADULTS (19-59 YEARS) CHILDREN (0-18 
YEARS) 
ELDERLY PEOPLE 
(>=60YEARS) 
NB OF MEN NB OF 
WOMEN 
NB OF 
BOYS 
NB OF 
GIRLS 
NB OF MEN NB OF 
WOMEN 
# of referred patients having received cash 
for transport 
ND ND 3,000 679 707 741 771 50 52 
Number of companions of referred and 
hospitalized patients who received cash for 
subsistence 
ND ND 3,000 679 707 741 771 50 52 
Health Objective 3: Early detection of epidemics and response organization 
INDICATOR NEED BASELINE TARGET 
DISAGGREGATED TARGET 
ADULTS (19-59 YEARS) CHILDREN (0-18 
YEARS) 
ELDERLY PEOPLE 
(>=60YEARS) 
NB OF MEN NB OF 
WOMEN 
NB OF 
BOYS 
NB OF 
GIRLS 
NB OF MEN NB OF 
WOMEN 
% of reports from the early warning system 
sentinel sites received on time 
40 - - - - - - 
# of health districts at high risk of epidemics 
equipped with sampling equipment and 
sample transport material 
35 - - - - - - 
# of samples transported to Bangui on time 400 - - - - - - 
% of epidemic alerts investigated within 48 
hours 
20 - - - - - - 
# of health districts at high risk of epidemics 
equipped with rapid diagnosis samplings 
35 - - - - - - 
# of cases during a confirmed epidemic 
handled disaggregated by gender and age 
group 
500 - - - - - - 
# of health workers (disaggregated 
by gender) trained in epidemiological 
surveillance 
250 - - - - - - 
# of community relays (disaggregated 
by gender) trained in epidemiological 
surveillance 
1,000 - - - - - - 
# of people vaccinated during an epidemic 
response disaggregated by gender and age 
group 
25,000 - - 12,250 12,750 - - 
# of people (disaggregated by gender and 
age group) sensitized to epidemic risks 
300,000 67,914 70,686 74,088 77,112 4,998 5,202 
Food Security Objective 1: Improve food availability and access for acutely food-insecure 
populations, especially vulnerable men and women, girls and boys 
INDICATOR NEED BASELINE TARGET 
DISAGGREGATED TARGET 
ADULTS (19-59 YEARS) CHILDREN (0-18 
YEARS) 
ELDERLY PEOPLE 
(>=60YEARS) 
NB OF MEN NB OF 
WOMEN 
NB OF 
BOYS 
NB OF 
GIRLS 
NB OF MEN NB OF 
WOMEN 
# of affected people (disaggregated by 
gender) having received food assistance 
600,000 - 600,000 102,900 107,100 147,000 153,000 44,100 45,900 
Support for SO1 

76 
PARTIE III - ANNEXES: OBJECTIVES, INDICATORS & TARGETS 
INDICATOR NEED BASELINE TARGET 
DISAGGREGATED TARGET 
ADULTS (19-59 YEARS) CHILDREN (0-18 
YEARS) 
ELDERLY PEOPLE 
(>=60YEARS) 
NB OF MEN NB OF 
WOMEN 
NB OF 
BOYS 
NB OF 
GIRLS 
NB OF MEN NB OF 
WOMEN 
# of people (disaggregated by gender) 
who benefited from the distribution of food 
coupons 
110,000 - 110,000 18,865 19,635 26,950 28,050 8,085 8,415 
# of people (disaggregated by gender) having 
received the seed protection ration 
200,000 - 140,000 24,010 24,990 34,300 35,700 10,290 10,710 
# of people having received assistance with 
market gardening inputs 
60,000 - 55,000 9,433 9,818 13,475 14,025 4,043 4,208 
Food Security Objective 2: Strengthen the resilience of vulnerable populations to food crises and 
support the restoration of livelihoods and emergency agricultural production 
INDICATOR NEED BASELINE TARGET 
DISAGGREGATED TARGET 
ADULTS (19-59 YEARS) CHILDREN (0-18 
YEARS) 
ELDERLY PEOPLE 
(>=60YEARS) 
NB OF MEN NB OF 
WOMEN 
NB OF 
BOYS 
NB OF 
GIRLS 
NB OF MEN NB OF 
WOMEN 
# of people (disaggregated by gender) who 
have received food assistance against the 
creation of productive assets 
70,000 - 65,000 11,148 11,603 15,925 16,575 4,778 4,973 
# of people having benefited from food 
provisions purchased from smallholder 
farmers 
200,000 - 160,000 27,440 28,560 39,200 40,800 11,760 12,240 
# of people having received assistance in 
agricultural food inputs 
400,000 - 350,000 60,025 62,475 85,750 89,250 25,725 26,775 
# of beneficiaries (disaggregated by gender) 
of small-scale livestock activities 
50,000 - 30,000 5,145 5,355 7,350 7,650 2,205 2,295 
# of people benefiting from vaccinated cattle 
(cattle or goats) 
110,000 - 90,000 15,435 16,065 22,050 22,950 6,615 6,885 
Food Security Objective 3: Strengthen needs assessments, monitoring and early warning 
mechanisms and ensure access to information on food developments by ensuring gender sensitivity 
and conflict sensitivity 
INDICATOR NEED BASELINE TARGET 
DISAGGREGATED TARGET 
ADULTS (19-59 YEARS) CHILDREN (0-18 
YEARS) 
ELDERLY PEOPLE 
(>=60YEARS) 
NB OF MEN NB OF 
WOMEN 
NB OF 
BOYS 
NB OF 
GIRLS 
NB OF MEN NB OF 
WOMEN 
# of bulletin issued by an operational 
monitoring system 
6 - 4 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 
# of members (by gender) of national NGO 
and government staff trained in food security 
N/A 100 50 50 N/A N/A N/A N/A 
Telecom Objective 1 : Save lives: Affected populations have access to integrated emergency 
assistance to ensure their survival while preserving their safety and dignity 
INDICATOR NEED BASELINE TARGET 
# of sites and hotspots equipped with VHF/HF network and Internet 11 7 11 
Support for SO3 
Support for SO1 
Support for SO3 

77 
PARTIE III - ANNEXES: OBJECTIVES, INDICATORS & TARGETS 
Support for SO3 
INDICATOR NEED BASELINE TARGET 
# of sites with the rate of service availability 11 7 11 
% of satisfied service users 500 users 
Telecom Objective 2 : Preserve Human dignity: Affected and at-risk populations have better access 
to strengthened basic social services and their essential livelihood mechanisms are preserved 
INDICATOR NEED BASELINE TARGET 
# of sites transferred 7 3 7 
Coordination Objective 1 : Enhanced coordination for a more effective humanitarian response, 
relevant to the operational context and based on humanitarian principles 
INDICATOR NEED BASELINE TARGET 
# Semi-annual reviews of cluster and ICC/HCT performance 2 0 2 
# dashboards on humanitarian response produced by UNOCHA and shared 
with the humanitarian community 
4 4 4 
# of people sensitized on humanitarian principles and CMCoord guidance 
manuals organized 
1500 2000 
# of humanitarian partners trained on "do no harm, negotiation and 
mediation with armed groups" 
300 50 200 
% of projects funded by the humanitarian fund aligned with the HRP's 
strategic priorities 
100 85 100 
# of strengthened regional humanitarian coordination bodies at the 
regional level 
12 9 12 
# of mapping of funding with development donors produced 2 0 2 
Coordination Objective 2 : Integrated and credible contextual analysis and evidence-based 
advocacy 
INDICATOR NEED BASELINE TARGET 
# of multisectoral assessments carried out in sub-prefectures with the 
most severe needs 
# of dashboards on humanitarian response produced by UNOCHA and 
shared with the humanitarian community 
4 4 4 
The overview of humanitarian needs produced from the data of evident 
assessments 
2 1 2 
Number of public information products produced and published 300 300 
Coordination Objective 3 : Accountability towards affected populations 
. 
INDICATOR NEED BASELINE TARGET 
Adoption of the accountability framework to the affected population by 
the HCT 
1 0 1 
Adoption of the HCT protection strategy and action plan 1 0 1 
# humanitarian partners trained on prevention and response to GBV and 
cross-cutting protection 
120 0 80 
Support for SO1 
Support for SO1 , SO2 .SO3 
Support for SO1 , SO2 .SO3 

78 
PARTIE III - ANNEXES: OBJECTIVES, INDICATORS & TARGETS 
INDICATOR NEED BASELINE TARGET 
% of humanitarian fund projects that have integrated the gender marker 100 0 100 
% of funds allocated to low and medium risk partners 85 90 
% of HF-funded organizations that have incorporated the PSEA into the 
code of conduct signed by staff 
100 0 100 
% of projects financed by the HF that integrate accountability to the 
affected populations and consultation of beneficiaries in all monitoring 
bodies 
100 80 100 
Refugee Assistance Objective 1: Maintain a favorable protection environment and improve the 
response capacities of national authorities to save lives and provide a level of protection in line with 
international standards by maintaining open access to territory and asylum procedures. 
INDICATOR NEED BASELINE TARGET 
DISAGGREGATED TARGET 
ADULTS (19-59 YEARS) CHILDREN (0-18 
YEARS) 
ELDERLY PEOPLE 
(>=60YEARS) 
NB OF MEN NB OF 
WOMEN 
NB OF 
BOYS 
NB OF 
GIRLS 
NB OF MEN NB OF 
WOMEN 
% of people (disaggregated by gender and 
age group) cared for individually registered 
6,859 
100 
100 1,594 1,595 1,911 1,564 88 107 
% of people in care with individual protection 
documents 
6,859 100 100 1,594 1,595 1,911 1,564 88 107 
Access for persons in care to refugee status 
determination procedures (disaggregated by 
gender and age group) 
340 340 340 96 86 79 77 1 1 
# (disaggregated by gender) of authorities 
trained and sensitized 
300 150 150 99 51 - - - - 
Refugee Assistance Objective 2: Ensure assistance and improve access to basic social services for 
refugees, asylum seekers and returnees from CAR 
INDICATOR NEED BASELINE TARGET 
DISAGGREGATED TARGET 
ADULTS (19-59 YEARS) CHILDREN (0-18 
YEARS) 
ELDERLY PEOPLE 
(>=60YEARS) 
NB OF MEN NB OF 
WOMEN 
NB OF 
BOYS 
NB OF 
GIRLS 
NB OF MEN NB OF 
WOMEN 
% of households living in adequate housing 2,378 30 50 
% of targeted households whose basic needs 
are met through cash subsidies or vouchers 
for multiple purposes 
2,378 70 100 
% of primary-school-age children enrolled 
(disaggregated by gender) 
2,204 65 100 - - 1,092 1,112 - - 
Access to primary health care for cared 
people (disaggregated by gender and age 
group) 
6,859 6,859 6,859 1594 1,595 1911 1564 88 107 
% of food distributions where the food basket 
meets the recommendations of the Joint 
Assessment Mission 
12 25 50 
Support for SO3 
Support for SO1 , SO2 

79 
PARTIE III - ANNEXES: OBJECTIVES, INDICATORS & TARGETS 
Support for SO3 
Refugee Assistance Objective 3: Facilitate the process of local integration in CAR of long-term 
refugees 
INDICATOR NEED BASELINE TARGET 
DISAGGREGATED TARGET 
ADULTS (19-59 YEARS) CHILDREN (0-18 
YEARS) 
ELDERLY PEOPLE 
(>=60YEARS) 
NB OF MEN NB OF 
WOMEN 
NB OF 
BOYS 
NB OF 
GIRLS 
NB OF MEN NB OF 
WOMEN 
# of refugees (disaggregated by gender and 
age group) who have acquired a residence 
permit 
1000 0 1000 525 425 - - 30 20 
# of naturalized refugees (disaggregated by 
gender and age group) 
194 0 149 51 23 35 40 0 0 
# of refugees having opted for local 
integration and receiving IGA (disaggregated 
by gender and age group) 
1000 200 800 200 160 220 180 25 15 
# de rapatriés bénéficiant d'activités de 
réintégration dans les zones de retour 
(désagrégé par sexe et par tranche d'âge) 
25 000 0 25 000 5750 5 500 6000 5510 425 575 
Refugee Assistance Objective 4: Facilitate the voluntary repatriation to CAR of Central African 
refugees residing abroad 
INDICATOR NEED BASELINE TARGET 
DISAGGREGATED TARGET 
ADULTS (19-59 YEARS) CHILDREN (0-18 
YEARS) 
ELDERLY PEOPLE 
(>=60YEARS) 
NB OF MEN NB OF 
WOMEN 
NB OF 
BOYS 
NB OF 
GIRLS 
NB OF MEN NB OF 
WOMEN 
# of constructed and functional transit and 
passage centers 
6 2 4 
# of returnees (disaggregated by gender and 
age group) transported to their area of return 
in dignity and safety 
25,000 
4000 
25,000 5750 5,500 6000 5510 425 575 
# of returnees having benefited from return 
kits (disaggregated by gender and age group) 
25,000 4000 25,000 5750 5,500 6000 5510 425 575 
# of returnees benefiting from reintegration 
activities in return areas (disaggregated by 
gender and age group) 
25,000 0 25,000 5750 5,500 6000 5510 425 575 
Support for SO3 

80 
PARTIE III - ANNEXES: OBJECTIVES, INDICATORS & TARGETS 
THE NUMBER OF 
PEOPLE IN ACUTE 
FOOD INSECURITY 
WILL CONTINUE TO INCREASE 
Vital food aid sections can be 
exhausted and agricultural and 
livelihood programs reduced. 
Missing an opportunity to protect 
and restore livelihoods will lead 
to increased food and nutrition 
insecurity and vulnerability 
to future shocks. Subsistence 
activities aimed at reducing their 
dependence on assistance will be 
interrupted and their response 
capacity reduced, particularly 
in the areas most affected by 
insecurity in the country. 
LACK OF 
ADEQUATE 
HEALTH 
SERVICES WILL LEAD 
TO THE OUTBREAK OF 
EPIDEMICS 
Nearly 804,000 vulnerable people 
will not have access to curative, 
preventive and promotional 
health services and the lives of 
90,000 people affected by shocks 
will be at risk due to the absence 
of emergency health services, 
including the care of the injured. 
Nearly 300,000 people will be 
exposed to the risk of epidemics, 
mainly due to population 
displacements and the proximity 
of CAR to affected countries - 
Ebola (DR Congo) and cholera 
(Cameroon). 
PROTECTION 
At least 900,000 
people, including 
30,000 with specific needs, 
will not be covered by alert 
mechanisms, response to 
protection incidents and referrals. 
11,500 women and girls as 
well as men and boys at risk 
of sexual violence will not be 
able to benefit from adequate 
multisectoral care (medical, 
psychosocial, legal/judicial, socioeconomic 
reintegration). 
13,900 girls and boys affected 
by the conflict will not be able 
to benefit from support for 
socio-economic reintegration 
programs, with the risk of falling 
back into the ranks of armed 
groups. 4,500 children will not be 
reunited with their families. 
145,000 children living in 
crisis-affected areas will not be 
able to benefit from psychosocial 
activities. 
AND IF? 
...WE PROVIDE NO RESPONSE 
LACK OF 
’EDUCATION 
WILL INCREASE 
VULNÉRABILITIES TO 
PROTECTION RISKS 
600,000 displaced, returned 
or vulnerable children will be 
deprived of access to education. 
RISKS OF 
WATER-BORNE 
DISEASES WILL 
INCREASE 
More than 1.3 million people will 
be deprived of minimum access to 
safe drinking water for drinking, 
personal hygiene and household 
tasks. More than 800,000 people 
will not have access to sanitation 
facilities according to minimum 
standards. 
HUMANITARIAN 
ACTORS WILL 
NOT BE ABLE TO 
PROVIDE ASSISTANCE 
The air freight service will not 
be able to transport lifesaving 
items by air; humanitarian 
organizations will not have 
access to landlocked populations; 
common logistics services 
(storage and road transport) 
will have to stop. Passengers of 
humanitarian organizations will 
not be able to travel in provinces 
in a fast, efficient and secure 
manner. 

81 
PARTIE III - ANNEXES: OBJECTIVES, INDICATORS & TARGETS 
NUTRITION 
Nearly 90,000 n 
under five children 
suffering from acute malnutrition 
(38,000 children suffering from 
severe acute malnutrition and 
52,000 children suffering from 
moderate acute malnutrition) will 
not be included in therapeutic 
nutritional programs. 
SHELTER/NFI/ 
CCCM 
500,000 people will 
continue to be exposed to the 
risks of bad weather, looting or 
attacks due to lack of access to 
emergency shelters or NFI kits. 
Emergency stocks cannot be 
pre-positioned and the profiling 
of displaced populations and 
the monitoring of population 
movements cannot be carried 
out. 
AND IF? 
...WE PROVIDE NO RESPONSE

82 
PARTIE III - ANNEXES: acronyms 
ARI Acute Respiratory Infections 
CAR Central African Republic 
CBT Cash-based transfer 
CCCM Camp Coordination / Camp Management 
CEAG Children Exiting Armed Group 
CFS Child-Friendly Space 
CFSAM FAO/PAM Crop and Food Security Assessment Missions 
CHT Country Humanitarian Team 
CMAM Community-based Management of Acute Malnutrition 
CMCoord Civil-military Coordination 
CMP Commission on Population Movement 
CORE Community Relays 
DGH Directorate General of Hydraulics 
DTM Displacement Tracking Matrix 
ETC Emergency Telecommunications Cluster 
FOSA Health Facilities 
FTS Financial Tracking Service 
GAM Global Acute Malnutrition 
GBV Gender-Based Violence 
GBVIMS Gender-Based Violence Information Management System 
HF Humanitarian Funds 
HIV Human Immunodeficiency Virus 
HLP Housing, Land and Property 
HNO Humanitarian needs overview 
HRP Humanitarian Response Plan 
IASC Inter-Agency Standing Committee 
ICC Inter cluster Coordination 
ICCI Integrated Care of childhood illnesses 
IDP Internally Displaced People 
IGR Income Generating Activities 
INSO International NGO Safety Organization 
IOM International Organization for Migration 
IPC Integrated food security Phase Classification 
IYCF Infant and Young Child Feeding 
JRRRU Joint Rapid Response and Repression Unit for Sexual 
Violence against Women and Children 
LIW Labor-Intensive Work 
LLIN Long-Lasting Impregnated Mosquito Nets 
MAM Moderate Acute Malnutrition 
MDSR Maternal Death Surveillance and Response 
MEB Minimum Expenditure Basket 
MSA Multisectoral assessment 
MTP Money Transfer Programs 
NFI Non-Food Item 
NGO Non-Governmental Organization 
ACRONYMS

83 
PARTIE III - ANNEXES: acronyms 
NPRCPCAR National Plan for the Recovery and Consolidation of Peace 
in CAR 
NRWSA National Rural Water and Sanitation Agency 
NSFS National Survey for Food Security 
NWW New Way of Working 
OCHA Office for the Coordination of the Humanitarian Affairs 
OSF Operational Strategic Framework 
PSEA Prevention of sexual and exploitation abuse 
RDH Regional Directorate of Hydraulics 
RMF Response Monitoring Framework 
RRM Rapid Response Mechanism 
SALW Small Arms and Light Weapons 
SAM Severe Acute Malnutrition 
SEA Sexual Exploitation and Abuses 
SOC Strategic Orientation Committee 
SODECA Water distribution company in Central Africa 
STI Sexually Transmitted Diseases 
TSLCP Temporary space for learning and child protection 
UNDP United Nations Development Program 
UNDSS United Nations Department of Safety and Security 
UNHAS United Nations Humanitarian Air Service 
UNHCR United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees 
UNICEF United Nations Children's Fund 
UNIMSMCAR United Nations Integrated Multidimensional Stabilization 
Mission in the Central African Republic 
UNO United Nations Organization 
USC Unaccompanied and Separated Children 
WASH Water, Hygiene and Sanitation

84 
PARTIE III - ANNEXES: acronyms 
This document is produced on behalf of the Humanitarian Country Team and partners. 
This document provides the Humanitarian Country Team’s shared understanding of the crisis, including the most pressing 
humanitarian needs, and reflects its joint humanitarian response planning. 
The designation employed and the presentation of material on this report do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever 
on the part of the Humanitarian Country Team and partners concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of 
its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. 
www.unocha.org/car 
www.humanitarianresponse.info/en/operations/central-african-republic 
@ocha_car

