YEMEN 
Photo: UNICEF 
FEBRUARY 2019 
2019 
RESPONSE PLAN 
HUMANITARIAN 
JANUARY-DECEMBER 2019

This document is produced by the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (UNOCHA) on behalf of 
the Humanitarian Country Team and partners. 
This document provides the Humanitarian Country Team’s shared understanding of the crisis, including the most pressing 
humanitarian needs, and reflects its joint humanitarian response planning. 
The boundaries and names shown and the designations used on this map do not imply official endorsement or acceptance by the United Nations. 
Creation date: 28 November 2018. Sources: GoY/MoLA/CSO. 
www.unocha.org/yemen 
www.ochayemen.org/hpc 
www.humanitarianresponse.info/en/operations/yemen 
@OCHAYemen 
YEMEN REFERENCE MAP 
Red Sea 
Gulf of Aden 
Arabian Sea 
SAUDI ARABIA 
OMAN 
ERITREA 
DJIBOUTI 
HADRAMAUT 
AL JAWF SHABWAH 
MARIB 
LAHJ 
ABYAN 
TAIZZ 
SA'ADA 
IBB 
HAJJAH AMRAN 
AL MAHARAH 
SANA'A 
AL BAYDA 
DHAMAR 
AL HUDAYDAH 
AL DHALE'E 
RAYMAH 
AL MAHWIT 
ADEN 
AMANAT 
AL ASIMAH 
Ibb 
Zingibar 
Al Bayda City 
Al Hazm 
Al Hudaydah 
Ad Dhale'e 
Al Mahwait City 
Al Ghaydah 
Taizz 
Hajjah 
City 
Al Mukalla City 
Dhamar City 
Al Jabin 
Ataq 
Sa'adah 
Sana'a 
Aden 
Amran 
Al Hawtah 
Marib City 
100 Km 
SOCOTRA 
LEGEND
Capital City 
Governorate Capital 
Governorate Boundary 
District Boundary 
Coastline

03 
PART I: . Yemen Reference Map 
TABLE OF CONTENT 
PART I: COUNTRY STRATEGY 
The humanitarian response plan at a glance ................. 04 
Overview of the crisis ........................................................ 05 
2019 Humanitarian strategy ............................................. 10 
Humanitarian access .......................................................... 13 
Targeting and monitoring ................................................. 15 
Summary of needs, targets and requirements ............... 16 
PART II: CLUSTER PLANS 
Food Security and Agriculture .......................................... 18 
Nutrition .............................................................................. 19 
Health ................................................................................... 20 
Water, Sanitation and Hygiene ........................................ 21 
Protection ............................................................................ 22 
Shelter and Site Management .......................................... 23 
Education ............................................................................. 24 
Refugee and Migrant Multi-Sector .................................. 25 
Rapid Response Mechanism ............................................. 26 
Logistics ............................................................................... 27 
Emergency Telecommunications ..................................... 28 
Coordination ....................................................................... 29 
PART III: ANNEX 
Strategic Objectives, indicators and targets .................. 31 

04 
PART I: The Humanitarian Respons e Plan at a glanc e 
THE HUMANITARIAN RESPONSE PLAN 
AT A GLANCE 
ESTIMATED POPULATION 
30.5M 
PEOPLE IN NEED 
24.1M 
PEOPLE TARGETED 
21.4M
OPERATIONAL PRESENCE: NUMBER OF PARTNERS 
254 organisations 
PEOPLE WHO NEED HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE 
24.1M 
REQUIREMENTS (US$) 
$4.2bn 
HUMANITARIAN PARTNERS 
254 
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 1 
Helping millions of 
destitute Yemenis 
overcome hunger 
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 2 
Reducing outbreaks 
of cholera and 
infectious diseases 
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 3 
Promoting the 
dignity of displaced 
families living in 
emergency and IDP 
settlements 
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 4 
Reducing the risk of 
displacement and violence 
against civilians and 
facilitating the recovery of 
people traumatized by the 
conflict 
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 5 
Preserving the 
capacity of public 
sector institutions 
to deliver life-saving 
basic services 
1,500 - 55,000 
55,001 - 108,000 
108,001 - 178,000 
178,001 - 290,000 
290,001 - 513,000 31 - 45 
23 - 30 
17 - 22 
10 - 16 
1 - 9 
INTERNALLY DISPLACED PEOPLE 
3.34M 
RETURNEES 
1M 
50,001 - 81,618 
28,001 - 50,000 
12,001 - 28,000 
5,001 - 12,000 
1 - 5,000 
0 
60,001 - 130,788 
40,001 - 60,000 
20,001 - 40,000 
10,001 - 20,000 
1 - 10,000 
0

05 
PART I: Overview of the crisis 
1. After four years of continuous conflict, the humanitarian 
crisis in Yemen is the worst in the world. A higher percentage 
of people face death, hunger and disease than in any other 
country. The degree of suffering is nearly unprecedented. 
Eighty percent of the entire population requires some form 
of humanitarian assistance and protection, an increase of 84 
per cent since the conflict started in 2015. Twenty million 
Yemenis need help securing food and a staggering 14 
million people are in acute humanitarian need. 
2. Ten million people are one step away from famine and 
starvation. Two hundred and thirty of Yemen’s 333 districts 
are now food insecure. This includes 148 districts which are 
classified as phase 4 under the Integrated Phase Classification 
(IPC) system, 45 districts with families in IPC phase 5, and 
37 districts which have global acute malnutrition rates above 
15 percent. For the first time in Yemen, assessments confirm 
the presence of catastrophic levels of hunger. At least 65,000 
people are already in advanced stages of extreme food 
deprivation and 238,000 people in districts with IPC 5 areas 
will face similar conditions if food assistance is disrupted for 
even a few days. 
3. Seven million, four hundred thousand people, nearly 
a quarter of the entire population, are malnourished, 
many acutely so. Acute malnutrition rates exceed the WHO 
emergency threshold of 15 percent in five governorates and 
close to 30 percent of all districts record critical levels of 
malnutrition. Two million malnourished children under 
five and 1.1 million pregnant and lactating women require 
urgent treatment to survive. 
4. Conditions are worsening at a nearly unprecedented 
rate. In 2014, prior to the conflict, 14.7 million people 
required assistance. In 2015, this number increased to 
15.9 million; in 2016 to 21.2 million and in 2018 to 22.2 
million. In 2019, 24.4 million people need assistance to 
survive. The number of severely food-insecure districts 
has risen by 60 percent in one year from 107 districts in 
2018, to 190 in 2019. In the last 12 months, the number of 
people unable to predict when they will next eat has risen 
by 13 percent and is expected to increase by 20 percent 
or more unless humanitarian operations are dramatically 
expanded in the early months of 2019. 
5. The severity of suffering is shocking. The number of 
civilians in acute humanitarian need across all sectors has 
risen 27 percent since last year. In the health sector, the 
number has risen 49 percent to 14 million. In the shelter 
sector, the number has increased 73 percent; in protection 
26 percent and in education 32 percent. In every cluster, at 
least half of all the people in need are in acute need. Acute 
needs are highest in the conflict-impacted governorates of 
Hodeida, Sa’ada and Taizz, where more than 60 per cent of 
the population requires help to survive. 
6. Every humanitarian sector and most, if not all parts of the 
country, are impacted by the conflict. In the health sector, 
203 districts are classified as acute. Less than 50 per cent of 
health facilities across the country are fully functional and 
those which are operational lack specialists, equipment and 
medicines. Immunization coverage has decreased by 20-30 
percent since the conflict started and most health personnel 
OVERVIEW OF 
THE CRISIS 
The humanitarian crisis in Yemen is the worst in the world, driven by conflict, economic 
collapse and the continuous breakdown of public institutions and services. 
104 DISTRICTS WITH THE MOST SEVERE NEEDS ACROSS 
MULTIPLE SECTORS 
104 districts 
230 DISTRICTS AT RISK OF FAMINE 
IPC 4 districts 
IPC 5 areas 
Critical malnutrition

06 
PART I: Overview of the crisis 
have not received salaries for two years, or more. In the 
shelter sector, 207 districts are now classified as acute. In 
the water and sanitation sector, 167 districts are classified 
as acute, a four-fold increase since 2018. Only 22 percent of 
rural and 46 percent of urban populations are connected to 
partially functioning public water networks and less than 55 
percent of the population has access to safe drinking water. 
In the education sector, 36 per cent of school-age girls and 
24 per cent of boys do not attend school. Fifty one percent 
of teachers have not been paid since 2016, hundreds of 
schools have been destroyed and more than 1,500 have been 
damaged by air strikes or shelling. 
Aden 
Aden 
Hadramaut 
Al Maharah 
Al Jawf 
Shabwah 
Marib 
Abyan 
Sana'a 
Amran 
Am. Al Asimah 
Sa'ada 
Hajjah 
Al Mahwit 
Taizz 
Lahj 
Al Hudaydah 
Ibb 
Al Dhale'e 
Dhamar 
Al Bayda 
Raymah 
15,170 
Total reported incidents* 
Number of Conflict Incidents 
801 - 1,323 
401 - 800 
151 - 400 
51 - 150 
1 - 50 
* Incidents include airstrikes, armed clashes and shelling; increase from the previous year is due to more accurate reporting, rather than an increase in conflict. 
Source: UN source, October 2017 - September 2018 
NUMBER OF CONFLICT INCIDENTS (OCT 2017 - SEP 2018) 
7. The human cost of the conflict is enormous. Partners 
estimate that 70,000 people in Yemen have been killed since 
early 2016. The UN has verified nearly 18,000 conflictrelated 
civilian casualties and in the last year alone, civilian 
casualties have risen by at least 11 percent. Indiscriminate 
attacks on civilians and civilian infrastructure and breaches 
of international humanitarian law are widespread. Fighting 
has damaged water and electricity infrastructure, irrigation 
systems, agricultural sites, hospitals, water points, sanitation 
plants and economic assets. Areas along many of the more 
than 30 front-lines have been mined. The number of grave 
violations of children’s rights has more than doubled in the 
past year and reported incidents of gender-based violence 
have increased 70 percent. 
8. Since 2015, nearly 15 percent of the entire population, 4.3 
million people, have been forced to flee their homes; 3.3 
million people are still displaced. More than 685,000 people 
have been newly displaced in the past year, the majority by 
fighting in Hodeida and along the western coast. Close to 74 
percent of displaced families outside hosting sites are living 
in rented accommodation; 22 percent are being hosted by 
families. Nearly 300,000 of the most destitute and vulnerable 
IDPs are living in 1,228 collective sites; 83 per cent of these 
sites have no health services, 39 percent report water deficits 
and 43 percent have no toilets. Nearly one-third of all IDPs 
live in the 104 districts across the country with the highest 
convergence of complex, multi-dimensional problems 
including food insecurity, insufficient protection safeguards, 
governance deficits, disease outbreaks and the widespread 
lack of basic public services including health care, water, 
sanitation and electricity. 
9. People are now at higher risk, and less able to cope, than at 
any stage of the conflict. Negative coping mechanisms and 
harmful practises are spreading across the country. Child 
marriage is estimated to have increased threefold between 
2017 and 2018. Child recruitment into armed forces 
continues and extreme forms of child labour are expanding. 
Partners report disturbing increases in family and sexual 
and gender-based violence. Hundreds of thousands of 
households have fallen into destitution and tens of millions 
face immiseration and extreme deprivation. Conditions are 
particularly difficult for older people, people with disabilities 
and other marginalized and socially excluded groups. 

07 
PART I: Overview of the crisis 
2013 2014 2015 Revised 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 
13.1M 
14.7M 
15.9M 
21.1M 21.2M 20.7M 
22.2M 
24.1M 
Sources: CAP 2013; PMR 2017; HNOs 2014-2019 
PEOPLE IN NEED (2013 - 2019) 
10. Refugees and migrants continue to enter Yemen. More 
than 422,000 refugees and migrants, most from the Horn of 
Africa, are living in precarious conditions because of their 
status. Thirty percent of the 150,000 new arrivals in 2018 were 
unaccompanied minors; four percent were children under 
five. The majority face discrimination, nearly a third have no 
income, some are arbitrarily detained and others trafficked. 
11. The rapid depreciation of the Yemeni riyal during the 
last quarter of 2018, combined with credit and import 
restrictions, has put millions of people at further risk. Within 
the space of a few short weeks in September and October 2018, 
as the riyal lost 65 percent of its value, Yemen was brought to the 
brink of famine. Tens of thousands of destitute families across 
the country were unable to purchase the commodities they 
needed to survive, including food and fuel. The crisis became 
so severe so quickly, the UN Security Council was seized with 
the issue, insisting that urgent steps be taken to support the 
currency and ease credit and import restrictions. 
12. The events of September and October followed three 
years of continuing economic collapse. Since 2015, Yemen’s 
economy has contracted by nearly 50 percent. Cumulative 
losses in real GDP are estimated at USD 49.9 billion and at 
least 600,000 jobs have been lost. Agricultural production 
and fishing, employing nearly 70 percent of the workforce, 
have shrunk by a third. More than 80 per cent of Yemenis 
now live below the poverty line, an increase of one-third since 
the conflict began. Public sector salaries are either unpaid or 
irregularly paid, disrupting incomes for more than a quarter 
of the population. In northern Yemen, at least 500,000 civil 
servants have received no salaries for nearly three years. 
ESTIMATED GDP LOSSES (2015-2018) 
13. The loss of purchasing power has occurred at the same 
time that the prices of basic commodities are soaring. 
Monthly imports through the key ports of Hodeida and 
Saleef are currently 20 percent lower than 2015, forcing 
prices upwards in a country that imports nearly 90 percent 
of staple commodities. Inflation has risen 40 percent in one 
year, driven by the liquidity crisis, exhaustion of foreign 
reserves and the rapid expansion of money supply. Price 
pressures have been greatest on core commodities. The cost 
of a food basket increased 60 percent last year and average 
food prices are now nearly 150 per cent higher than before 
the conflict. Fuel prices rose by 200 percent in 2018 compared 
to pre-crisis prices, impacting agriculture, water supply, 
transport, electricity, health and sanitation services. Oil and 
gas production, which provided 60 percent of fiscal revenue 
and foreign exchange before the crisis, have plummeted. 
Remittances from abroad also have dropped sharply due to 
restrictions on transfers to Yemeni banks. 
All indicators point to a difficult year ahead 
14. The largest humanitarian operation in the world is 
underway in Yemen. During 2018, 48 international and 194 
local partners have worked together to reach an average of 
eight million people each month with life-saving support. At 
least one form of humanitarian assistance has been provided 
during the past twelve months to families in all of Yemen’s 
333 districts. The reach of the operation is impressive. In 
2018, the health cluster assisted 12 million people each 
month, the WASH cluster 11.5 million people and the food 
security and agriculture cluster reached 7.5 million people. 
15. The impact of the operation has been demonstrable and 
significant. Millions of lives have been saved and hundreds 
of thousands of Yemeni families have been helped to survive 
one of the most difficult periods in their country’s history. 
Of the many milestones achieved during 2018, four stand 
out in terms of impact, scale and efficiency. First, as a direct 
result of the massive, synchronized and very rapid scale-up 
of all forms of humanitarian aid achieved during 2018, 45 
of the 107 districts facing extreme food insecurity at the 
beginning of last year are no longer pre-famine. Second, 
food security partners have successfully managed one of 
the largest, fastest and most difficult scale-ups of assistance 
anywhere in the w Source: MOPIC, Socioeconomic Update (issue 34), June 2018 orld increasing the number of people 
2015 2016 2017 2018 
25.5 26.6 27.6 28.7 
17.3 14.7 13.1 13.5 
$49.9Bn Cumulative losses in real GDP during 2015-2018 
Potential GDP without conflict GDP with conflict

08 
PART I: Overview of the crisis 
reached each month with food assistance from three 
million to an astonishing 10 million by the first month of 
2019. Third, nutrition partners, working through public 
institutions, have helped to cure a higher percentage of 
children suffering from severe acute malnutrition than in 
any comparable operation globally. Fourth, health partners, 
working in close partnership with local institutions, have 
stemmed the largest cholera outbreak in modern history, 
reducing the number of new cases from one million in the 
year and a half before to 311,000. 
16. Major impact has been achieved across virtually every 
cluster. For the first time in the conflict, 680,000 people fleeing 
their homes have received emergency assistance within days, 
and sometimes, hours of their displacement. Hundreds of 
humanitarian staff, both international and national, stayed 
in Hodeida during six months of near constant conflict and 
bombardment, helping to keep the port open, and storing, 
loading and dispatching nearly half of million metric 
tonnes of wheat to districts across the country. Vaccination 
campaigns against diphtheria, measles, rubella and polio 
have reached 13.2 million people. More than 230,000 women 
and girls have benefitted from life-saving reproductive 
health services and partners have helped to ensure the safe 
delivery of 20,700 new-bornes. Half a million Yemenis in 
19 governorates have received protection services including 
psychosocial support, assistance with documentation, legal 
services and comprehensive case management for children 
and sur¬vivors of sexual and gender-based violence. 
17. Confronted with an increasingly difficult operating 
environment, the humanitarian operation is better run, 
better monitored and more efficient. For the first time, 
partners have developed a comprehensive contingency 
plan and pre-positioned emergency supplies in hubs near 
areas where mass displacement is expected. An Emergency 
Concept of Operations detailing assessment, targeting and 
monitoring protocols has been elaborated for Hodeida, 
helping to ensure a more principled response even at the 
height of the fighting. A Rapid Response Mechanism for 
reaching newly displaced families within hours has been 
introduced for the Hodeida operation and is now being 
expanded nationwide to 307 districts. 
18. Faced with increasing needs and limited capacity, the HRP 
was prioritized at mid-year across first-line, second line 
and full cluster responses. After being restructured, the 
Multi-Cluster Location Assessment was used in September 
and October to measure needs and confirm baselines in 6,791 
locations across the country. SMART surveys have been 
conducted for the first time since 2016 in 15 governorates and 
NUMBER OF PEOPLE IN NEED BY SECTOR 
9.9M 
14M 
12.6M 
8.2M 
4.4M 
4.5M 
3.7M 
Refugees and Migrants Multi-sector 0.17M 
Education 
Shelter and Site Management 
Nutrition 
Health 
Protection 
Water, Sanitation and Hygiene 
Food Security and Agriculture 20.1M 
19.7M 
17.8M 
14.4M 
7.4M 
6.7M 
4.7M 
0.17M 
49% 
71% 
71% 
57% 
60% 
67% 
79% 
100% 
Percentage of 
acute PiN 
People in 
People in need acute need 

09 
PART I: Overview of the crisis 
the IPC assessment was successfully conducted on the basis 
of the most rigorous protocols in IPC history in all of Yemen’s 
333 districts. Third party monitoring has been expanded 
across eight sectors and for the first time, is being done 
across the HRP has a whole. After months of discussion, a 
biometric system for verifying foo security beneficiaries will 
be introduced during the first quarter of 2019. 
19. Partners are already gearing up in the expectation that 
conflict will continue, and may intensify, along at least 
some of the more than 30 front-lines. In the most likely 
scenario, partners are bracing for the possibility that 
between 500,000 and 1.2 million people may be newly 
displaced. In areas where the parties redeploy under the 
auspices of the peace process, partners are also preparing to 
support as many as 750,000 people who may return to their 
homes. Economic problems are likely to continue including 
fluctuations in the exchange rate, import restrictions and 
delays in paying civil servants. Shortages of fuel are expected 
and the prices of basic commodities, including food, are 
likely to remain out of reach for millions of families. Partners 
also recognize that the operational budgets for ministries and 
public institutions will almost certainly remain inadequate 
to address the demand and need for health care, education, 
water, sanitation and social protection. 
Food Security and Agriculture Health 
Water, Hygiene and Sanitation Protection 
Nutrition 
Refugee and Migrant Multi-Sector Emergency Employment and 
Education Community Rehabilitation 
Shelter and Site Management 
People Reached People Reached People Reached 
People Reached People Reached People Reached 
People Reached People Reached People Reached 
7.5M 5.7M 12.0M 
11.5M 4.8M 1.4M 
1.8M 0.16M 0.33M 
BENEFICIARIES BY CLUSTER (JAN-DEC 2018) 

10 
PART I: 2019 Humanitarian Strat egy 
2019 HUMANITARIAN 
STRATEGY 
Humanitarian partners are committed to doing everything possible during 2019 to 
help civilians in Yemen survive violence, secure food and receive the nutrition, health, 
WASH, shelter, education and protection support they are entitled to under international 
humanitarian and human rights law. Recognizing the magnitude of the crisis, but working 
with only limited capacity and confronted by multiple obstacles, humanitarian partners 
are adopting a high-impact strategy with five priority strategic objectives. During 2019, in 
accordance with the cardinal humanitarian principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and 
operational independence, more than 242 partners across the country are committed to: 
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES 
Helping millions of destitute Yemenis overcome 
hunger 
by providing food assistance, increasing household incomes 
and livelihood assets, and advocating for measures that bring 
economic stability. Partners will monitor progress in achieving 
this objective by tracking the percentage decrease in the number 
of IPC phase 4 districts and areas with populations in IPC phase 
5. Of the multiple steps partners will take to meet this objective, 
special attention will be given to: 
• Scaling-up emergency food assistance including in-kind 
supplies, cash and vouchers to reach all people in IPC 4 and 
5 areas and highly vulnerable IDPs 
• Scaling-up conditional and season-specific cash or vouchers 
to reach severely food insecure households in IPC 3+ areas 
• Scaling-up agricultural and fishing support to destitute 
families in IPC 4 and 5 areas 
• Scaling-up treatment of acute malnutrition for children under 
5 and pregnant and lactating women in IPC 4 and 5 areas 
• Intensifying monitoring of food security and nutrition in 
IPC 3, 4 and 5 areas 
Reducing outbreaks of cholera and infectious 
diseases 
by repairing and decontaminating water and sanitation systems, 
expanding epidemiological surveillance and treating patients as 
quickly as possible. Partners will monitor progress in achieving 
this objective by tracking the percentage decrease in the number 
of outbreaks of cholera and infectious diseases. Of the multiple 
steps partners will take to meet this objective, special attention 
will be given to: 
• Intensifying monitoring of the risk factors leading to infection 
and the sources of transmission in all high-risk districts 
• Scaling-up repair of broken water and sanitation systems in all 
high-risk districts 
• Scaling-up emergency WASH preparations and increasing the 
number and capacities of district-level Rapid Response WASH 
Teams in all high-risk districts 
• Scaling-up vaccinations, emergency health preparations, 
expanding the minimum service package in priority health 
facilities and increasing the number and capacities of districtlevel 
Rapid Response Health Teams in all high-risk districts. 
• Upgrading and expanding the number of Diarrhea Treatment 
and Oral Rehydration Centres in all high-risk districts 
Promoting the dignity of displaced families 
living in emergency and IDP settlements 
by providing a minimum service package including food assistance, 
shelter, health care, emergency education, water and sanitation and 
protection services. Partners will monitor progress in achieving 
this objective by tracking the percentage increase in the number of 
IDP settlements where the minimum service package is provided. 
Of the multiple steps partners will be taking to meet this objective, 
special attention will be given to: 
• Helping local authorities better manage formal and informal sites 
• Engaging with local authorities to ensure that formal and 
informal sites are secure and that families living in the sites 
are protected and have access to emergency services

11 
PART I: 2019 Humanitarian Strat egy 
• Scaling-up basic WASH, health, shelter and protection 
assistance in 489 under-served sites and establishing rapid 
referral mechanisms for out-of-site services 
Reducing the risk of displacement and violence 
against civilians and facilitating the recovery 
of people traumatized by the conflict 
by advocating for adherence to international humanitarian law 
and providing specialized services and support. Partners will 
monitor progress in achieving this objective by tracking the 
percentage decrease in the number of conflict-related incidents 
with civilian impact. Of the multiple steps partners will be 
taking to meet this objective, special attention will be given to: 
• Intensifying monitoring of incidents which impact the 
safety and security of civilians 
• Scaling-up specialized assistance to the victims of violence 
• Marking and clearing land infested by explosive remnants 
of war and unexploded ordnance 
Preserving the capacity of public sector institutions 
to deliver life-saving basic services 
by rehabilitating public infrastructure, providing key inputs and 
helping to cover priority operational costs. Partners will monitor 
progress in achieving this objective by tracking the percentage 
of humanitarian assistance provided through public sector 
institutions. Of the multiple steps partners will be taking to meet 
this objective, special attention will be given to: 
• Providing allowances, in accordance with UN fiduciary rules, 
to staff in public institutions working on priority programmes 
• Helping to cover key operational costs, in accordance with 
UN fiduciary rules, in specific public institutions providing 
emergency health, WASH and education services in areas 
where services are collapsing 
• Rehabilitating key public service infrastructure in conflictimpacted 
areas where services are collapsing 
STRATEGIC FOCUS 
Humanitarian partners remain committed to taking the right 
steps at the right time. In 2019, this means that partners will be: 
Working across the humanitarian and development nexus to 
address the drivers of food insecurity 
Recognizing that the majority of factors driving food insecurity 
require action across the humanitarian and development 
nexus, partners are adding a major livelihoods component 
to the HRP designed to boost household incomes in IPC 3, 
4 and 5 areas. Key partners will continue to advocate with 
Government authorities, the Yemen Central Bank and 
member states to increase liquidity, accelerate letters of credit, 
establish mechanisms for ensuring sufficient supplies of fuel, 
expand credit, pay civil servants and introduce price support 
mechanisms in remote markets. Partners working across the 
nexus, including through World Bank-funded programmes, are 
committed to expanding the social protection floor including 
additional emergency cash programmes, a larger emergency 
cash transfer programme and special support programmes for 
destitute pensioners widow-headed and disabled households. 
Doing everything possible to expand nutrition services and remove 
the barriers that prevent families from using these 
Recognizing that malnutrition is a key driver of child mortality 
and morbidity, partners will be intensifying efforts across the 
country to identify, reach and treat children who are suffering 
from the combination of illness and severe acute malnutrition. 
Partners will also scale-up efforts to identify and immediately 
treat children suffering from severe acute and moderate acute 
malnutrition. New measures aimed at removing the barriers 
that prevent families from seeking care will be introduced and 
expanded including travel allowances and family feeding at 
treatment centres. Preventative measures will include blanket 
supplementary feeding and intensive awareness raising in all 
IPC 4 districts and areas with populations in IPC phase 5. 
Putting protection at the centre of the operation 
Recognizing that millions of civilians across the country are 
subject to violence and bombardment on a daily basis, partners will 
continue to track the impact of the conflict on civilians and civilian 
infrastructure. With conditions deteriorating rapidly, partners will 
intensify their advocacy with all parties to respect and uphold all 
aspects of international humanitarian law, international human 
rights law and international refugee law. Major efforts will be made 
to provide specialized assistance and support to the survivors of 
violence, including women, girls and marginalized families. 
Concentrating services and support in the districts facing the most 
difficult, complex problems 
Recognizing that more than half of all IDPs live in the 104 districts 
with the highest convergence of complex, multi-dimensional 
needs and problems, partners will immediately scale-up and 
expand the supply and distribution of core humanitarian services 
in these areas including food assistance, nutrition, healthcare, 
WASH, shelter and protection. Partners will also focus on 
reducing the obstacles that prevent families from accessing and 
using these services including financial barriers and exclusionary 
practises and will fast-track high-income interventions including 
cash transfers, public works schemes and agriculture and 
fishing initiatives. Because the majority of the 104 districts are 
impacted by security and governance deficits, humanitarians will 
reach across the nexus to involve development organizations in 
initiatives to improve administration and governance. 
Reversing exclusion and addressing gender-specific needs 
Recognizing that hundreds of thousands of people who need 
help are being excluded from assistance, partners will intensify 
their advocacy with authorities to ensure that aid reaches 
civilians regardless of their gender, age, political affiliation, 

12 
PART I: Overview of Strat egy 
social character or ethnicity. Partners will also introduce new 
delivery mechanisms in areas where populations are being 
routinely excluded and will continue to use the IASC Gender 
with Age Marker to ensure that assessments accurately track 
gender-specific needs. 
Supporting the safe, dignified and voluntary returns of displaced 
families 
Recognizing that many families may decide to return to their 
communities, partners will establish special registration centres 
where returnees will receive initial support through the Rapid 
Response Mechanism. Households will also benefit from mine risk 
awareness and specialized protection services coordinated through 
these centres. As soon as registration lists are verified, vulnerable 
families will receive food assistance and first-line support based 
on assessments from the WASH, health, shelter, protection and 
education clusters. Additional support over the medium-term 
will include specialized assistance to address housing, land and 
property issues, as well as assistance to help recover livelihoods. 
Asking people what they need and want 
Recognizing that families know their needs better than anyone 
else, partners will expand beneficiary feedback and redress 
mechanisms, including call centres, and introduce community 
perception surveys to better understand the range, and interconnectedness 
of needs and the factors driving these. As part 
of their commitment to the Framework for Accountability to 
Affected Populations, partners will also continue to provide 
information to beneficiaries, involving the community in 
decision-making, educating staff on social norms developing 
programmes based on participatory assessments. 
Scaling-up operations as quickly as possible across the country 
Recognizing the staggering increase in suffering and need 
across the country, partners will establish new operational hubs 
in under-served areas including Mokha, Al Thorba, Mukallah 
and Mareb. Partners will invest in additional storage, refueling 
and transport capacities including air, land and sea modalities. 
Major efforts will be made to improve and expand connectivity 
and communications and to upgrade port facilities and key 
transport routes. Building on the efforts of all clusters to 
expand partnerships, the Yemen Humanitarian Country Fund 
will channel funds to front-line partners working in IPC 4 and 
5 areas and in the 104 districts with the highest concentration 
of multi-dimensional needs. 
UNHCR/Bathoul Ahmed

13 
PART I: Humanitarian Acc ess 
HUMANITARIAN 
ACCESS 
As many as 6.5 million people, including 4.1 million who are in acute need, are 
currently living in 83 hard-to-reach districts where humanitarians face moderate or 
severe access constraints. Access to the 60 districts with moderate constraints and 23 
districts with severe constraints is impacted by three main factors--conflict, bureaucratic 
impediments and logistics, which often overlap. 
In 46 of the 83 hard-to-reach districts, access is predominantly 
impacted by conflict, including shifting front-lines. These 
districts account for 51 percent of the people living in hard-toreach 
areas. In 33 districts, access is predominantly impacted 
by bureaucratic restrictions, including denial of visas and 
residency permits, denial of travel permits, delays in approving 
and clearing imports of essential equipment and refusal to 
sign sub-agreements. These districts account for 47 percent 
of the people living in hard-to-reach areas. In four districts, 
logistic constraints, including damaged or destroyed roads, 
difficult physical terrain, and seasonal weather are the main 
impediments to access. These districts account for two percent 
of the people living in hard-to-reach areas. 
During 2019, humanitarian partners will be making major 
efforts during 2019 to expand and improve access. In areas 
where the main access impediments are conflict-related, civil 
liaison officers will be deployed to help open and structure 
the operating space. In areas where the main impediments 
are bureaucratic, partners will build on the Emergency 
Concept of Operations for Hodeida to introduce mutual 
accountability frameworks detailing the assessment, targeting, 
registration, implementation and monitoring arrangements for 
humanitarian activities. OCHA will also continue to track the 
status of all visa requests, travel permits, humanitarian imports 
and sub-agreements with the aim of strengthening advocacy 
and engagement with authorities. 
83 HARD-TO-REACH DISTRICTS 
SEVERITY SCORE 
Low (250 districts) 
Medium (60 districts) 
High (23 districts) 
Frontlines

14 
PART I: Humanitarian Acc ess 
OCHA/Giles Clarke 
On behalf of humanitarian partners, OCHA will continue 
to facilitate a number of system-wide mechanisms including 
the deconfliction protocols which help to ensure the safety of 
humanitarian staff, movements and operations in coordination 
with the Evacuation and Humanitarian Operations Committee 
(EHOC) in Riyadh. The OCHA team will maintain a list of more 
than 23,000 humanitarian sites protected under international 
humanitarian law and will continue to correlate access and 
severe vulnerabilities in high priority districts including the 45 
districts with areas classified as IPC 5 and the 104 districts with 
the highest convergence of multiple, acute needs. In addition, 
OCHA will improve the existing access monitoring framework 
by introducing a new methodology to correlate access data 
with information on barriers, obstacles and impediments at 
the district-level. 

15 
PART I: Humanitarian targ eting and monitoring 
TARGETING AND 
MONITORING 
Recognizing the overriding importance of ensuring that assistance reaches the people 
most in need, every cluster has taken steps during 2018 to review, and where necessary, 
clarify the criteria used to identify beneficiaries. Clusters have also strengthened the 
mechanisms used during assessments, including protocols to help partners detect 
exclusion and inclusion errors. In a major step forward, the food security cluster and 
local authorities have agreed on a new beneficiary targeting mechanism and the 
expansion of biometric registration for the first time into northern areas. Committed to 
identifying irregularities of any kind and to taking corrective action based on evidence, 
humanitarian partners have established a framework for monitoring operations at 
multiple levels. This framework includes: 
Situation monitoring which tracks developments and trends 
across the country that impact core humanitarian programming. 
In 2019, the majority of situation monitoring will be conducted 
by clusters, and in some cases, individual agencies. These 
efforts will be supported, where appropriate, by the UN’s Risk 
Mitigation Unit. Specific monitoring mechanisms will include, 
but are not limited to: Quarterly Integrated Phase Classification 
Updates including Famine Risk Monitoring in high-risk districts 
and SMART surveys conducted by the FSAC, nutrition and 
health clusters; weekly Disease Surveillance conducted by the 
health cluster; Monthly Market Monitoring conducted by WFP 
and FAO; Household WASH surveys conducted by the WASH 
cluster; and Annual Household-Level Multi-Cluster Location 
Assessment facilitated by OCHA, UNHCR and IOM. 
Response monitoring which tracks the progressive steps 
being taken to reach the targets in each cluster strategy. During 
2019, response monitoring will be conducted by cluster partners 
using relevant field tools to monitor output indicators. Clusters 
will report monthly to OCHA on the status of output targets, 
disaggregated by geographic area. OCHA will use these inputs 
to produce monthly 4W databases detailing humanitarian 
coverage across the country. Cluster inputs will be collated 
into monthly dashboards, mid-year and end-of-year Periodic 
Monitoring Report (PMR), issued in August 2019 and March 
2020 respectively. 
Impact monitoring which measures progress against the 
HRP’s five strategic objectives and the impact of each cluster’s 
first-line, second-line and full cluster responses. During 
2019, cluster partners will use standardized methodologies to 
monitor a single impact indicator for each of the HRP’s five 
strategic objectives and for each of the 29 impact indicators 
across the 12 cluster strategies. To enable benchmarking, each 
indicator will include a baseline and annual target. 
HRP monitoring which reinforces and cross-checks existing 
monitoring mechanisms. During 2019, HRP monitoring will 
be conducted by OCHA through an independent Third-Party 
Monitor. This specialized monitoring process will assess the 
accuracy of agency reporting by reviewing and comparing 
results with information contained in tracking documents. 
Using beneficiary interviews, physical observation and key 
informant interviews, Third Party Monitors will also verify the 
delivery of humanitarian assistance and supplies to intended 
beneficiaries and targeted facilities in selected districts.

16 
PART I: Summary of needs , targ ets and requir ements 
SUMMARY OF 
NEE DS, TARGETS AND 
REQ UIREMENTS 
PEOPLE IN NEED 
24.1M 
PEOPLE IN ACUTE NEED 
14.3M 
REQUIREMENTS (US$) 
$4.2bn 
20.1M 
7.37M 
19.7M 
17.8M 
14.4M 
6.7M 
4.7M 
0.17M 
1.9M 
10M 
4.4M 
14M 
12.6M 
8.2M 
4.5M 
3.7M 
0.17M 
1.9M 
49% 
71% 
71% 
57% 
79% 
67% 
60% 
100% 
100% 
18.8M 
5.97M 
15.8M 
12.6M 
4.8M 
3M 
2.7M 
0.17M 
1.9M 
100 
38 
71 
67 
48 
90 
69 
17 
22 
90 
38 
254 
TOTAL 
People in need People in acute need % acute PiN 
TOTAL 24.1M 14.3M 59% 50% $4.2bn 
2,209 
320 
627 
285 
153 
222 
105 
122 
49 
68 
5.5 
26 
Food Security 
and Agriculture 
Nutrition 
Health 
Water, Sanitation 
and Hygiene 
Protection 
Shelter and Site 
Management 
Refugees and 
Migrants Multi-sector 
Rapid Response 
Mechanism 
Logistics 
Coordination 
Emergency 
Telecommunications 
Education 
US$ million 
TARGET PARTNERS REQUIREMENTS

17 
PART I: Summary of needs , targ ets and requir ements 
PART II: 
CLUSTER PLANS 
Food Security and Agriculture 
Nutrition 
Health 
Water, Sanitation and Hygiene 
Protection 
Shelter and Site Management 
Education 
Refugee and Migrant Multi-Sector 
Rapid Response Mechanism 
Logistics 
Emergency Telecommunications 
Coordination 

18 
PART II: CLUSTER PLANS 
SECOND LINE RESPONSE 
Reduce severe hunger among vulnerable families by: 
• Distributing conditional, and season-specific cash or vouchers 
and employing adults on public works schemes including projects 
that rehabilitate public infrastructure and community assets in IPC 
phase three districts 
• Distributing drip irrigation kits and solar water pumps in IPC phase 
three districts 
• Restocking small ruminants and distributing beekeeping kits in 
IPC phase three districts 
• Supporting rural food processing and facilitating micro-enterprises 
in IPC phase three districts 
• Providing support to targeted households in IPC phase three 
districts to help establish micro businesses 
To measure second line impact, partners will particularly track the 
percentage decrease in the number of households selling assets 
to buy food 
SUMMARY OF 
CLUSTER RESPONSE 
FOOD SECURITY AND 
AGRICULTURE 
PEOPLE IN NEED 
20.1M 
PEOPLE 
TARGETED 
18.8M 
ANNUAL 
REQUIREMENTS 
2.2bn 
PARTNERS 
100 ACUTE NEED 
10M 
CLUSTER OBJECTIVE 1 Increase access to food for highly vulnerable families across the 
country 
CLUSTER OBJECTIVE 2 Increase household incomes and rehabilitate food security assets 
in areas with high levels of food insecurity 
The Food Security and Agriculture Cluster requires USD 2.2 billion for 2019. Of the 100 partners in the cluster, 54 are involved in first and 
second line responses 
FIRST LINE RESPONSE 
Reduce severe hunger among highly vulnerable families 
by: 
• Distributing food, cash, or vouchers to severely food insecure 
families in IPC phase four districts and areas with populations in 
IPC phase five 
• Distributing food, cash, or vouchers to newly displaced and host 
families in high priority districts 
• Distributing conditional, and season-specific cash or vouchers 
and employing adults on public works schemes including projects 
that rehabilitate public infrastructure and community assets in IPC 
phase four districts and areas with populations in IPC phase five 
• Distributing agricultural and fishery kits to severely food insecure 
rural households in IPC phase four districts and areas with 
populations in IPC phase five 
To measure first line impact, partners will particularly track the 
percentage increase in the number of targeted households with a 
Food Consumption Score (FCS) greater than 42 
1.7BN 
491.4M 
TARGETING 
Based on district-level Famine Risk Monitoring (FRM) and Integrated 
Food Security Phase Classification (IPC) in all 333 districts, the Food 
Security and Agriculture Cluster is targeting: 
• 10 million severely food-insecure individuals in IPC phase four 
districts and areas with populations in IPC phase five will receive 
food, cash or vouchers each month 
• 2 million newly displaced and host individuals in high priority 
districts will receive food, cash or vouchers each month 
• 8 million severely food-insecure individuals in IPC phase four 
districts and areas with populations in IPC phase five will receive 
agricultural, livestock or fishery kits 
• 1.5 million food insecure individuals in IPC phase four districts and 
areas with populations in IPC phase five will benefit from cash for 
work and employment in public works schemes 
• 5.3 million food-insecure individuals in IPC phase three districts 
will receive conditional, and season-specific cash or vouchers and 
livelihoods support 
During 2019, the cluster will build on its achievements which include: 
• Distributing food, cash, or vouchers to an average of 4.2 million 
severely food-insecure individuals per month in IPC phase four 
areas 
• Distributing food, cash, or vouchers to an average of 3.2 million 
severely food-insecure individuals per month in IPC phase three 
areas 
• Distributing agricultural, livestock and fishery kits to 1.7 million 
severely food-insecure individuals in IPC phase four areas 
• Distributing agricultural, livestock and fishery kits to 400,000 
severely food-insecure individuals in IPC phase three areas 
• Providing longer term livelihood support to 160,000 individuals 
in IPC phase three areas

19 
PART II: CLUSTER PLANS 
NUTRITION 
PEOPLE IN NEED 
7.4M 
PEOPLE 
TARGETED 
6M 
ANNUAL 
REQUIREMENTS 
320M 
PARTNERS 
38 ACUTE NEED 
4.4M 
FIRST LINE RESPONSE 
Reduce acute malnutrition among highly vulnerable 
populations by: 
• Identifying and referring children and PLW with acute malnutrition 
to treatment programmes 
• Treating children suffering from severe acute malnutrition (SAM) 
with complications in therapeutic feeding centres 
• Providing financial support, including vouchers, to cover transport 
costs to treatment facilities for children suffering from SAM with 
complications 
• Providing food rations for care takers at treatment facilities 
• Treating children with SAM at outpatient treatment programmes 
• Treating children and PLW with moderate acute malnutrition 
(MAM) through targeted supplementary feeding programmes 
• Providing counselling on feeding practices to PLW and caretakers 
• Providing nutrition supplies and medicines 
To measure first line impact, partners will particularly track the 
percentage decrease in the number of districts with critical acute 
malnutrition 
SECOND LINE RESPONSE 
Reduce micronutrient malnutrition among highly 
vulnerable populations by: 
• Providing blanket supplementary feeding programmes (BSFPs) to 
children under two and pregnant and lactating women in the 165 
priority districts 
• Providing micronutrient supplements through Blanket BSFPs 
to children under two in 165 priority districts and multiple 
micronutrient powders to children over three in these districts 
and children under under-five in remaining districts 
• Deworming children under five 
• Providing vitamin A supplements to children aged under five years 
• Providing iron-folic acid supplements to PLW 
• Providing supplementary food to children under two in a phased 
approach across the country 
• Training partners on SMART surveys, assessments, information 
management and surveillance 
• Training frontline nutrition and health workers and community 
health volunteers on treatment protocols 
• Establishing 80 health facility-based sentinel sites in districts at risk 
of famine and conducting SMART surveys in high-risk districts across 
22 governorates 
To measure second line impact, partners will particularly track the 
percentage increase in the number of children under-five receiving 
micronutrient powders 
FULL CLUSTER RESPONSE 
Reach as many children suffering from malnutrition as 
possible by: 
• Increasing the number of TFCs from 83 to 120 
• Expanding the coverage of outpatient treatment programmes to 
90 per cent and TSFPs to 80 per cent 
• Conducting mass MUAC screening, deploying mobile teams, 
scaling up outreach and tracking case management and default 
rates in districts at risk of famine 
• Providing WASH kits and testing and treating malaria among 
children suffering from acute and moderately acute malnutrition 
To measure full cluster impact, partners will particularly track the 
percentage increase in coverage rates for inpatient and outpatient 
treatments and TSFPs 
TARGETING 
Based on 2018 SMART surveys and Emergency Food Security and 
Nutrition Assessments in 15 governorates, 2017 SMART surveys in 
three governorates, a 2016 SMART survey in one governorate and 
a 2016 Emergency Food Security and Nutrition Assessment in three 
governorates, the Nutrition Cluster is targeting as follows: 
• Of the 357,487 children under five in need of SAM treatment, a 
minimum of 285,990 will benefit from support 
• Of the 1.68 million children under five and 1.1 million PLW in 
need of TSFPs, a minimum of 937,878 children under five and 
639,210 PLW will benefit from support 
• Of the 800,719 children under two and 1,211,146 PLW in need 
of BSFPs, 100 per cent of the children and lactating women in 
need in 107 high-risk districts and 60 per cent in 58 new high-risk 
districts will benefit from support 
145.7M 
149.9M 
During 2019, the cluster will build on its 2018 achievements which 
include: 
• Supporting SAM programmes in 328 districts and MAM programmes 
in 276 districts, including, 83 TFCs, 3,605 Outpatient Therapeutic 
Programmes (OTP) and 3,028 TSFPs of which 2,806 provide OTPs 
and TSFPs in same sites, and 194 mobile teams 
• Screening and referring 1,665,950 boys and 1,708,034 girls under 
five for treatment of acute malnutrition 
• Treating 345,463 severely acutely malnourished children under 
five with or without complications 558,386 moderately acutely 
malnourished children under five and 402,845 PLW with acute 
malnutrition 
• Providing counselling and messaging on feeding practices to 
1,778,853 pregnant women and caretakers of children under 
two years. 
• Providing 855,054 children under two with multiple micronutrient 
powders and 3,424,667 children with vitamin A 
• Deworming 738,865 children and providing 1,191,017 pregnant 
women with iron-folic acid supplements 
24.7M 
CLUSTER OBJECTIVE 1 Reduce the prevalence of and prevent acute malnutrition among 
children under five and pregnant and lactating women (PLW) 
and other vulnerable population groups 
CLUSTER OBJECTIVE 2 Expand coverage of nutrition services and remove the barriers 
that prevent families from using them 
The Nutrition Cluster requires USD 320 million for 2019. Of the 38 partners in the cluster, all are involved in first and second line responses

20 
PART II: CLUSTER PLANS 
HEALTH 
PEOPLE IN NEED 
19.7M 
PEOPLE 
TARGETED 
15.8M 
ANNUAL 
REQUIREMENTS 
627M 
PARTNERS 
71 ACUTE NEED 
14M 
FIRST LINE RESPONSE 
Help provide the core components of the Minimum Service 
Package (MSP) in high priority districts by: 
• Procuring, pre-positioning and providing essential medicines and 
supplies to health units, health centres and hospitals 
• Providing general service and trauma care, communicable disease 
prevention and control, the Minimum Initial Service package for 
reproductive health and inpatient care for people suffering from 
Severe Acute Malnutrition 
• Providing specialized care for cancer and renal failure 
• Vaccinating vulnerable groups against oral cholera vaccines (OCV), 
measles, oral polio vaccine (OPV) and diphtheria 
• Establishing a medical air bridge for patients suffering from 
conditions that cannot be treated inside Yemen 
• Providing emergency training, fuel, water and incentives for 
health staff 
To measure first line impact, partners will particularly track the 
percentage decrease in the number of reported cases of cholera 
SECOND LINE RESPONSE 
Help ensure that highly vulnerable people have access to 
an expanded range of health services in high priority districts by: 
• Supporting all additional components of the Minimum Service 
Package including child and maternal health care, noncommunicable 
disease prevention and care, mental health and 
psychosocial services 
• Upgrading vaccination programmes, including cold chain 
equipment, operational support, training and social mobilization 
To measure second line impact, partners will particularly track the 
percentage increase in the number of targeted health facilities 
providing the Minimum Service Package 
FULL CLUSTER RESPONSE 
Help strengthen health systems and infrastructure in high 
priority districts by: 
• Training doctors, nurses and midwives 
• Renovating, rehabilitating and equipping non-functional health 
facilities in high priority districts 
• Upgrading drug supply and health information systems 
• Upgrading rehabilitation centres for war-wounded 
To measure full cluster impact, partners will particularly track the 
percentage increase in the number of targeted people benefitting 
from the MSP at all levels of care in priority districts 
TARGETING 
Based on Health Resources Availability Mapping (HeRAMS), the 
MCLA and other assessments in 22 governorates, the Health Cluster 
is targeting as follows: 
• Of the 611,330 children under one in need of immunization, 
580,765 will benefit from support 
• Of the 4,930,086 women of child bearing age in need of 
comprehensive obstetric care, 3,944,068 will benefit from support 
• Of the 788,814 pregnant women in need of skilled attendants at 
delivery, 378,630 will benefit from support 
• Of the 19,720,344 people in need of at least one consultation per 
person per year, the 15,776,275 will benefit from support 
493.5M 
72.2M 
61.5M 
During 2019, the cluster will build on its 2018 achievements which 
include: 
• Providing health consultations to 11.8 million people 
• Providing immunization services to 541,715 children 
• Treating 31,620 trauma patients with medical care at the hospitals 
• Assisting 223,000 women during deliveries 
• Providing antenatal and postnatal care to 1.2 million women 
• Providing clinical care to 992 survivors of sexual and gender-based 
violence 
• Training 12,800 health staff on the Minimum Service Package, 
1,650 midwives on reproductive health, and 12,000 community 
health workers and volunteers on hygiene promotion and 
disease prevention 
CLUSTER OBJECTIVE 1 Improve access to primary, secondary and tertiary health care 
including district hospitals in priority districts 
CLUSTER OBJECTIVE 2 Help ensure that health facilities in priority districts are able to 
respond to epidemics and outbreaks 
CLUSTER OBJECTIVE 3 Help restore functionally of the closed or damaged health 
facilities in high priority districts 
The Health Cluster requires USD 627 million in 2019. Of the 71 partners 
in the cluster, 50 are involved in first and second line responses

21 
PART II: CLUSTER PLANS 
WATER, SANITATION 
AND HYGIENE 
PEOPLE IN NEED 
17.8M 
PEOPLE 
TARGETED 
12.6M 
ANNUAL 
REQUIREMENTS 
285M 
PARTNERS 
67 ACUTE NEED 
12.6M 
CLUSTER OBJECTIVE 1 Provide emergency water sanitation and hygiene services and 
assistance to highly vulnerable people 
FIRST LINE RESPONSE 
Help ensure newly displaced families in high-risk areas have 
access to safe drinking water and sanitation services by: 
• Providing fuel and disinfecting agents and repairing public water 
supply systems 
• Trucking water and providing storage containers at communal 
and household levels 
• Providing filters and chlorine tablets to at-risk households 
• Monitoring water quality at household and grid level 
• Providing operational support and maintenance to sanitation 
systems in at-risk areas 
• Constructing and desludging communal emergency latrines 
• Distributing basic hygiene kits and cholera kits 
• Messaging on safe hygiene practices in high risk areas 
• Conducting emergency cleaning campaigns 
To measure first line impact, partners will particularly track the 
percentage decrease in the number of reported cases of water 
borne disease, including cholera 
SECOND LINE RESPONSE 
Expand water and sanitation services for displaced families and 
vulnerable host communities in priority districts by: 
• Rehabilitating public water systems and promoting water quality 
surveillance and monitoring 
• Expanding the number of water facilities receiving fuel and 
operational support 
• Expanding the number of sanitation facilities receiving fuel and 
operational support and maintenance 
• Expanding the number of households receiving water storage 
containers 
• Rehabilitating and desludging household latrines 
• Supporting solid waste collection and disposal 
• Building the capacity of local WASH partners and conducting 
cleaning campaigns 
To measure second line impact, partners will particularly track the 
percentage increase in the number of people in acute need with access 
to safe water and sanitation services 
FULL CLUSTER RESPONSE 
Help maintain the functionality of water and sanitation systems by: 
• Improving and augmenting water supply, treatment and quality 
surveillance systems 
• Building the institutional capacity of local water and sanitation 
authorities 
• Improving and upgrading sanitation systems 
• Installing waste collection and disposal systems in targeted 
municipalities 
• Promoting hygiene awareness 
To measure full cluster impact, partners will particularly track 
the percentage increase in the number of upgraded water and 
sanitation systems 
TARGETING 
Based on the WASH Household Assessment, MCLA, SMART surveys, 
and eDews morbidity data, the WASH Cluster is targeting as follows: 
• 10.7 million people will benefit from improved public water 
systems 
• 5.5 million people will benefit from improved public sanitation 
systems 
• 4.8 million people will benefit from emergency water supplies 
• 1.1 million people in 102 pre-famine districts will benefit from 
sanitation services 
• 4.1 million people in 192 cholera risk districts will receive adequate 
safe drinking water 
• 7.2 million people will access hygiene items and awareness 
162M 
73M 
50M 
During 2019, the cluster will build on its 2018 achievements which 
include: 
• Supporting public water supply systems facilities benefitting 7.9 
million people 
• Supporting public sanitation facilities benefitting 3.9 million 
people 
• Providing key hygiene items to 6.7 million people 
• Dispatching rapid reaction teams in response to 140,000 cholera 
alerts 
• Providing emergency water supplies to 1.3 million displaced 
people 
• Providing emergency sanitation to 900,000 people 
CLUSTER OBJECTIVE 2 Restore and maintain sustainable water and sanitation systems, 
particularly in high-risk areas 
The WASH Cluster requires USD 285 million for 2019. Of the 67 partners 
in the cluster, all are involved in first and second line responses

22 
PART II: CLUSTER PLANS 
CLUSTER OBJECTIVE 1 Provide specialized assistance to people with specific protection 
needs, including the victims of violence 
CLUSTER OBJECTIVE 2Support community centres, programmes and protection 
networks 
PROTECTION 
PEOPLE IN NEED 
14.4M 
PEOPLE 
TARGETED 
4.8M 
ANNUAL 
REQUIREMENTS 
153M 
PARTNERS 
69 ACUTE NEED 
8.2M 
FIRST LINE RESPONSE 
Help address the immediate protection needs of highly 
vulnerable people by: 
• Identifying and referring people with specific needs, including 
women, children, the elderly and people living with disabilities 
to service providers 
• Assisting people without documentation and referring them to 
appropriate authorities 
• Distributing cash assistance to people and households at 
extreme risk 
• Distributing family, transit and dignity kits 
• Releasing contaminated land, disposing unexploded ordnance 
and raising awareness of risks posed by mines 
To measure first line impact, partners will particularly track the 
percentage increase in the number of at-risk people who receive 
protection assistance or specialized services 
SECOND LINE RESPONSE 
Facilitate the work of community-level solidarity initiatives by: 
• Training community volunteers and service providers on safety, 
conflict resolution and prevention of violence 
• Supporting community programmes, including skills and livelihood 
initiatives, for the victims of violence 
To measure second line impact, partners will particularly track the 
percentage increase in the number of volunteers trained 
FULL CLUSTER RESPONSE 
Help communities prevent and address protection issues by: 
• Building the capacity of national, district and community partners 
and institutions to promote safety, support survivors of violence, 
and help resolve local level disputes 
To measure full cluster impact, partners will particularly track the 
percentage increase in the number of priority communities where 
specialized services are available 
TARGETING 
Based on severity and the MCLA in 22 governorates, the Protection 
Cluster is targeting as follows: 
• 187,622 people with specific needs, including women, children, 
the elderly, people living with disabilities, and victims of violence, 
will benefit from specialized services 
• 115,358 people will receive protection cash assistance 
• 140,101 family, transit and dignity kits will be distributed 
• 1.7 million people will benefit from mine risk awareness 
• 10 million square meters of contaminated land will be released 
• 14,500 community volunteers and service providers will receive 
training on conflict resolution, resilience, safety and prevention 
of violence 
• 2.5 million people will benefit from community programmes and 
initiatives 
98.6M 
50.9M 
3.5M 
During 2019, the cluster will build on its 2018 achievements which 
include: 
• Identifying, referring and providing specialized services for more 
than 142,135 people with specific needs, including women and 
children 
• Providing more than 60,133 households with protection cash 
assistance 
• Distributing more than 120,350 family, transit and dignity kits 
• Providing mine risk education to more than 2.1 million people 
• Surveying and clearing more than 6.3 million square meters of 
land 
• Training more than 13,643 community volunteers and service 
providers 
• Supporting community programmes and initiatives for more than 
1.1 million persons 
The Protection Cluster requires USD 153 million for 2019. All of the 69 partners in the cluster are involved in first and second line responses

23 
PART II: CLUSTER PLANS 
SHELTER AND SITE 
MANAGEMENT 
PEOPLE IN NEED 
6.7M 
PEOPLE 
TARGETED 
3M 
ANNUAL 
REQUIREMENTS 
222M 
PARTNERS 
90 ACUTE NEED 
4.5M 
CLUSTER OBJECTIVE 1 Provide safe, appropriate shelter and essential household items 
to displaced and highly vulnerable families 
CLUSTER OBJECTIVE 2 Coordinate the delivery of a Minimum Service Package (MSP) 
in under-served emergency and IDP settlements 
FIRST LINE RESPONSE 
Provide immediate emergency supplies to newly displaced 
families and help ensure basic services are available at under-served 
IDP settlements by: 
• Distributing household and emergency shelter kits and where 
appropriate, winterization grants 
• Identifying gaps in the delivery of basic services in under-served 
emergency and IDP settlements sites and coordinating with 
partners and local committees to cover these 
• Providing rental subsidies and where appropriate cash grants to 
rehabilitate damaged houses 
• Constructing and rehabilitating transitional shelters in areas where 
families require protection and additional support 
To measure first line impact, partners will particularly track the 
percentage increase in the number of under-served IDP settlements 
where the MSP is available 
SECOND LINE RESPONSE 
Help upgrade living conditions for families living in IDP settlements 
and transitional shelter arrangementsby: 
• Providing maintenance support and shelter upgrades 
To measure second line impact, partners will particularly track the 
percentage increase in the number of families benefitting from an 
upgraded shelter 
TARGETING 
Based on Site Management Baseline Assessments in 1,200 sites, 
and the MCLA, the Shelter and Site Management Cluster is targeting 
as follows: 
• 489 IDP settlements in 39 districts in 12 governorates will receive 
MSPs 
• 941,000 people in 177 districts in 21 governorates will 
receive household kits, 491,000 people in 157 districts in 19 
governorates will receive emergency shelter kits (ESKs) and 
412,000 people in 110 districts in 18 governorates will receive 
winterization cash grants 
• 598,000 people in 140 districts in 20 governorates will receive 
rental subsidies and 150,000 people in 140 districts in 14 
governorates will receive household cash grants 
• 125,000 people in 110 districts in 18 governorates will receive 
cash grants to rehabilitate damaged houses 
• 84,000 people in 76 districts in 17 governorates will be housed 
in transitional shelters and 107,000 people in 39 districts in 12 
governorates will receive maintenance support 
206M 
2M 
FULL CLUSTER RESPONSE 
Increase the sustainability of shelter arrangements by: 
• Providing cash grants to reconstruct damaged houses 
To measure full cluster impact, partners will particularly track the 
percentage increase in the number of returnees living in adequate 
housing 
14M 
During 2019, the cluster will build on its 2018 achievements which 
include: 
• Distributing household kits to 554,000 people and cash grants 
to 29,000 people for household items 
• Distributing ESKs to 136,000 people and cash grants to 13,000 
people for emergency shelter 
• Distributing rental subsidies to 380,000 people 
• Distributing winterization kits to 46,000 people and cash grants 
to 15,000 people 
• Distributing cash grants to 830 people to rehabilitate 120 
damaged houses 
• Constructing transitional shelters for 11,000 people 
The Shelter and Site Management Cluster requires USD 222 million for 2019. Of the 90 partners in the cluster, 61 are involved in .rst and 
second line responses

24 
PART II: CLUSTER PLANS 
EDUCATION 
PEOPLE IN NEED 
4.7M 
PEOPLE 
TARGETED 
2.8M 
ANNUAL 
REQUIREMENTS 
105M 
PARTNERS 
48 ACUTE NEED 
3.7M 
CLUSTER OBJECTIVE 1 Help maintain basic education services, particularly in areas where 
schools are damaged, closed or unable to fully operate because 
of budget, payroll and other conflict-related constraints 
FIRST LINE RESPONSE 
Help ensure schools remain open and operational by: 
• Providing allowances for unpaid teachers 
• Providing schools meals to boys and girls 
• Establishing Temporary Learning Classrooms (TLCs) for displaced 
children 
• Distributing kits, texts, hygiene materials, furniture and supplies 
to targeted schools 
• Providing specialized child-centered programmes in hard-hit areas 
• Facilitating national exams 
To measure first line impact, partners will particularly track the 
percentage increase in the number of functional schools 
SECOND LINE RESPONSE 
Help restore damaged and destroyed schools by: 
• Rehabilitating buildings, including WASH facilities 
• Training specialized education staff on emergency data collection 
and analysis 
To measure second line impact, partners will particularly track the 
percentage increase in the number of children remaining in formal 
education 
FULL CLUSTER RESPONSE 
Help strengthen teaching and the management of schools and 
education services by: 
• Training teachers, school managers, supervisors and family councils 
To measure full cluster impact, partners will particularly track the 
percentage increase in the number of teachers teaching on at least 
80 per cent of school days 
TARGETING 
Based on the MCLA, Task Force for Population Movember (TFPM) 
figures, Ministry of Education (MoE) enrolment records and field 
data, the Education Cluster is targeting as follows: 
• 142,000 unpaid teachers in 11 governorates will receive allowances 
• 63,500 children will benefit from Temporary Learning Spaces (TLSs) 
• 1,500,000 children will benefit from education supplies 
• 950,000 children will receive school meals 
• 795, 000 children will benefit from specialized child-centered 
programmes 
• 394,000 children will benefit from rehabilitated schools 
64M 
33M 
8.4M 
During 2019, the cluster will build on its 2018 achievements which 
include: 
• Rehabilitating 1,193 schools benefitting 417,819 children 
• Providing meals to 432,521 children 
• Distributing education supplies benefitting 171,299 children 
• Providing specialized programmes for 181,430 children 
• Providing TLCs for 48,868 children 
• Providing specialized services benefiting 463,856 children 
The Education Cluster requires USD 105 million in 2019. Of the 48 partners in the cluster, 30 are involved in first line response

25 
PART II: CLUSTER PLANS 
REFUGEE AND MIGRANT 
MULTI-SECTOR 
PEOPLE IN NEED 
170K 
PEOPLE 
TARGETED 
170K 
ANNUAL 
REQUIREMENTS 
122M 
PARTNERS 
17 
ACUTE NEED 
170K 
CLUSTER OBJECTIVE 1 Facilitate durable solutions including Assisted Spontaneous 
Return (ASR) and Voluntary Humanitarian Return (VH R) 
programmes 
CLUSTER OBJECTIVE 2 Provide life-saving, multi-sectoral assistance and specialized 
support to refugees, asylum-seekers and migrants with acute 
needs 
FIRST LINE RESPONSE 
Provide, in coordination with authorities, life-saving assistance to 
vulnerable refugees, asylum-seekers and migrants by: 
• Facilitating voluntary return of refugees and migrants to their 
countries of origin 
• Distributing food assistance and drinking water 
• Delivering critical health, WASH and shelter services 
• Distributing direct assistance 
• Registering and documenting new arrivals 
To measure first line impact, partners will particularly track the 
number of persons who have voluntarily returned to their countries 
of origin 
SECOND LINE RESPONSE 
Provide, in coordination with authorities, specialized services 
for women at risk, pregnant and lactating women, the elderly, 
unaccompanied minors, people living with serious medical 
conditions and people with disabilities by: 
• Referring highly vulnerable children including unaccompanied 
children and children with disabilities to specialized services 
• Facilitating education at locations agreed with the authorities 
• Helping to build the capacity of coastal authorities and registration 
agencies and stakeholders, including at the community level 
To measure second line impact, partners will particularly track the 
percentage increase in the number of targeted people that have 
benefited from at least one form of specialized assistance 
TARGETING 
Based on the MCLA, the Protection Baseline Assessment and the 
Displacement Tracking Matrix, the Refugees and Migrants Multi- 
Sector (RMMS) is targeting as follows: 
• Of the 422,355 refugees, asylum-seekers and migrants estimated 
to be in Yemen, 170,000 will receive some form of assistance 
91M 
30.5M 
During 2019, partners will build on their 2018 achievements which 
include: 
• Reaching 180,000 targeted people with support 
• Facilitating the voluntary return of 3,548 refugees and migrants 
to their countries of origin 
• Providing shelter to 8,487 refugees in Kharaz camp in Lahj 
governorate 
• Providing life-saving medical assistance to 87,769 refugees, 
asylum-seekers and migrants, cash assistance to 6,551 refugees, 
asylum-seekers, and education support to 10,997 refugees and 
host community children 
• Registering 31,848 migrants in order to access returns, basic 
services and other assistance 
Refugee and migrant partners require USD 122 million for 2019. All of the 17 partners in the sector are involved in first and second line responses 

26 
PART II: CLUSTER PLANS 
CLUSTER OBJECTIVE 1 Provide immediate, life-saving emergency assistance to families 
who are newly displaced and in hard-to reach areas and to 
destitute returnees 
RAPID RESPONSE 
MECHANISM 
PEOPLE IN NEED 
1.9M 
PEOPLE 
TARGETED 
1.9M 
ANNUAL 
REQUIREMENTS 
49M 
PARTNERS 
22 ACUTE NEED 
1.9M 
FIRST LINE RESPONSE 
Distribute immediate, life-saving emergency supplies and 
cash assistance to families who are on the move, in hard-to-reach 
areas, returning to their homes, caught at checkpoints or stranded 
close to the front lines by: 
• Pre-positioning supplies in mobile storage units and safe, 
accessible sites 
• Activating teams and distributing RRM Kits (immediate response 
rations (IRR), basic hygiene kits and dignity kits)within 72 hours of 
receiving and verifying information on the movement and location 
of displaced people 
• Providing multi-purpose cash assistance (MPCA) and other 
support including shelter kits, non-food items and hygiene 
supplies to newly displaced persons for 1-3 months following 
rapid verification and needs assessments 
• Facilitating rapid needs assessments as soon as first distributions 
are over to trigger first-line and second-line cluster responses 
• Distributing RRM Kits to the most destitute returnees within 72 
hours of receiving information on the location of those returnees 
To measure first line impact, partners will particularly track the 
percentage increase in the number of newly displaced IDP and 
returnee households receiving RRM kits 
TARGETING 
Based on Emergency Displacement Tracking and the Initial Situation 
Tool assessment, the RRM is targeting as follows: 
• 1.2 million newly displaced persons will receive RRM kits 
• 750,000 highly vulnerable returnees identified through registration 
centers will receive RRM kits 
• 480,000 most vulnerable IDPs will be benefit from cash grants 
and other support including shelter kits, non-food items and 
hygiene supplies 
48.6M 
During 2019, partners will build on their 2018 achievements which 
include: 
• Distributing 167,000 RRM kits to 1,002,000 people 
• Providing MPCA to more than 28,000 households 
The Rapid Response Mechanism (RRM) requires USD 49 million for 2019. All of the 22 partners in the RRM are involved in the first-line response

27 
PART II: CLUSTER PLANS 
CLUSTER OBJECTIVE 1 Provide a full-range of logistics support and services including 
cargo and passenger transport and storage to humanitarian 
partners throughout the country 
FIRST LINE RESPONSE 
Support humanitarian operations across Yemen by: 
• Facilitating cargo transport by air and sea to Ye men, and by land 
within the country 
• Facilitating temporary storage within Yemen 
• Providing passenger sea transport between Djibouti and Aden 
• Providing cargo and passenger air transport through UNHAS 
between Sana’a, Aden, Djibouti and Amman 
• Managing a revolving fuel facility and providing diesel to health 
and WASH facilities and key electricity systems that support civilian 
infrastructure 
To measure first line impact, partners will particularly track the 
percentage increase in the number of humanitarian organizations 
using common logistics services 
SECOND LINE RESPONSE 
Facilitate the delivery of life-saving humanitarian cargo and supplies 
into high priority districts by: 
• Rehabilitating key sections of Al Hudaydah port and expanding 
logistics infrastructure at high volume entry points including Sana’a 
and Aden 
• Acquiring equipment to increase cargo-handling capacity 
To measure second line impact, partners will particularly track the 
percentage increase in volume of cargo handling capacity at key 
entry points 
TARGETING 
Based on partner surveys, the Logistics Cluster is targeting as follows: 
• 10,000 metric tons (MTs) of relief supplies will be transported 
• 10,000 MTs of relief supplies will be stored 
• 500 passengers will be transported by sea 
• 12,000 passengers will be transported by air 
• 40 million liters of diesel will be distributed to health and WASH 
facilities 
LOGISTICS 
ANNUAL REQUIREMENTS 
68M 
PARTNERS 
90 
58.5M 
10M 
During 2019, the cluster will build on its 2018 achievements which 
include: 
• Transporting 12,078 passengers from 72 organizations on UNHAS 
flights and carrying out 40 medical evacuations (medevacs) 
• Transporting 537 passengers from 26 organizations on WF P 
chartered vessels 
• Transporting 2,431 MT of cargo by sea, 1,079 MT by air, and 13,647 
MT cargo by road 
• Storing 15,500 MT in Al Hudaydah, Aden and Sana’a on behalf 
of 17 organizations 
• Providing 27,410,412 liters of diesel to health centres, water 
corporations and vaccination centres 
The Logistics Cluster requires USD 69 million for 2019. Of the 90 partners in the cluster, all are involved in first and second line responses

28 
PART II: CLUSTER PLANS 
CLUSTER OBJECTIVE 1 Provide emergency telecommunications services to humanitarian 
partners throughout the country 
FIRST LINE RESPONSE 
Provide reliable communications services for humanitarian 
partners by: 
• Establishing, equipping and maintaining emergency 
telecommunications hubs 
• Establishing stand-by agreements with local service providers 
• Providing specialized telecommunication services for the Al 
Hudaydah response 
To measure first line impact, partners will track the percentage 
increase in the number of users reporting favourably on ETC services 
SECOND LINE RESPONSE 
Upgrade and expand telecommunications services for humanitarian 
partners by: 
• Expanding service desks to the field 
• Providing in-country and global training for national staff and 
service providers 
• Rehabilitating and upgrading communications centers and hubs 
To measure second line impact, partners will particularly track the 
percentage increase in the number of critical incidents reported to 
ETC helpdesks and resolved within 24 hours 
TARGETING 
Based on ETC assessments in five hubs, the ETC is targeting as 
follows: 
• 38 partners including 22 NGOs and 16 UN agencies will benefit 
from ETC services in Sana’a, Al Hudaydah, Ibb, Aden, Sa’ada, 
Mukalla, Al Mukha, and Al Turba 
EMERGENCY 
TELECOMMUNICATIONS 
ANNUAL REQUIREMENTS 
5.5M 
PARTNERS 
38 
3.8M 
1.7M 
During 2019, the cluster will build on its 2018 achievements which 
include: 
• Establishing and maintaining 25 Emergency Operations Centres 
for the cholera response 
• Opening six new ETC Internet connectivity hubs in Al Hudaydah, 
Sa’ada, and Aden 
• Upgrading network infrastructure in Ibb and Al Hudaydah hubs 
• Establishing an ETC helpdesk in Sana’a 
• Providing IT capacity building for staff 
The Emergency Telecommunications Cluster (ETC) requires USD 5.5 million in 2019

29 
PART II: CLUSTER PLANS 
32 
CLUSTER OBJECTIVE 1 Facilitate principled evidence-based humanitarian planning, 
action and advocacy 
FIRST LINE RESPONSE 
Facilitate core coordination capacities and competencies by: 
• Providing secretariat support to the Humanitarian Coordinator 
and Humanitarian Country Team 
• Providing all possible forms of direct support to clusters and 
facilitating inter-cluster mechanisms 
• Facilitating the humanitarian programme cycle including 
assessments, Humanitarian Needs Overview (HNO) and the 
Humanitarian Response Plan (HRP) 
• Facilitating the work of operational hubs including common 
datasets 
• Establishing and facilitating appropriate emergency modalities 
and mechanisms including emergency concepts of operation 
(ECOO) and an Emergency Operations Room (EOR) 
• Providing all possible support to expand access and create an 
enabling operational environment 
• Facilitating civil-military liaison, including de-confliction 
mechanisms 
• Managing the Yemen Humanitarian Fund (YHF ) 
• Identifying and promoting concrete steps to improve accountability 
to affected populations 
• Tracking contributions to the humanitarian operations and setting 
standards for donor reporting 
• Coordinating third party monitoring 
To measure first line impact, partners will particularly track the 
percentage increase in the number of regularly accessible areas 
SECOND LINE RESPONSE 
Facilitate increased roles for national NGOs and the private sector 
in humanitarian operations by: 
• Engaging with businesses, transporters, charities and endowments 
• Building the technical capacities of national NGOs 
To measure second line impact, partners will particularly track the 
percentage increase in the number of national partners receiving 
funding through the HRP 
TARGETING 
Based on partner surveys, the Coordination Cluster is targeting as 
follows: 
• All counterparts involved in the humanitarian operation will receive 
regular updates and situation analysis 
• All humanitarian partners involved in the cluster system will receive 
timely support 
• All donors contributing to the operation will receive timely 
information 
COORDINATION 
ANNUAL REQUIREMENTS 
26M 
PARTNERS 
254 
25M 
1M 
During 2019, the cluster will build on its 2018 achievements which 
include: 
• Disseminating six bi-monthly humanitarian dashboards, 15 
humanitarian snapshots, seven funding snapshots, nine 3W 
dashboards, 44 humanitarian updates, 19 access alerts, and 17 
situation reports 
• Disseminating interactive dashboards on needs, plans and 
responses on relevant websites 
• Developing a country-wide preparedness plan 
• Facilitating the sequencing and prioritization of the 2018 HRP 
• Facilitating the Multi-Cluster Location Assessment (MCLA) in 6,791 
locations across the country 
• Establishing an EOR for Al Huydaydah and facilitating the 
elaboration of an ECOO 
• Facilitating the Rapid Response Mechanism (RRM) 
• Facilitating major block grants to the HRP 
• Facilitating two reserve and one standard allocations of the YHF 
for 72 partners 
• Publishing regular public updates and sitreps on the humanitarian 
situation 
The Coordination Cluster requires USD 26 million for 2019

30 
ANNEX: Summary of needs , targ ets and requir ements 
PART III: ANNEX 
Strategic Objectives, indicators and targets

31 
ANNEX: Strat egic Objecti ves, indicators and targ ets 
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES, 
INDICATORS 
AND TARGETS 
2019 YHRP STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES 
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE IMPACT INDICATOR 2018 BASELINE 2019 TARGET 
SO1: Help millions of destitute Yemenis overcome hunger Percentage decrease in the number of IPC phase 4 districts 
and areas with populations in IPC phase 5 
190 districts 150 districts 
(20% reduction) 
SO2: Prevent large-scale outbreaks of cholera and 
infectious diseases 
Percentage decrease in the number of outbreaks of 
cholera and infectious diseases 
192 districts 172 districts 
(10% reduction) 
SO3: Promote the dignity of displaced families living in 
emergency, transit and hosting sites 
Percentage increase in the number of IDP sites where the 
minimum service package is provided 
0% 45% 
SO4: Reduce the risk of displacement and violence against 
civilians and facilitate the recovery of people traumatized 
by the conflict 
Percentage decrease in the number of incidents with 
civilian impact 
36.5% 32.9% 
SO5: Preserve the capacity of public sector institutions to 
deliver life-saving basic services 
Percentage of humanitarian assistance provided through 
public sector institutions 
15% 35% 
CLUSTER IMPACT INDICATORS 
Food Security and Agriculture 
RESPONSE TYPE INDICATORS BASELINE TARGET REQUIREMENTS ($) 
First Line Response Percentage of targeted households with Food 
Consumption Score (FCS) greater than 42 
33% 50% $1.7 billion 
Second Line Response percentage decrease in the number of 
households selling assets to buy food 
31% 16% $491.4 million 
Nutriton 
RESPONSE TYPE INDICATORS BASELINE TARGET REQUIREMENTS ($) 
First Line Response Percentage decrease in the number of districts with 
critical acute malnutrition 
91 districts 45 district 
(50% decrease) 
$145.7 million 
Second Line Response Percentage increase in the number of children 
under-five receiving micronutrient powders 
48.6% 60% $149.9 million 
Full Cluster Percentage increase in coverage rates for 
inpatient and outpatient treatments and targeted 
supplementary feeding programmes. 
"90 % for SAM without 
complications; 30% SAM 
with complications; 
38% for MAM " 
"95% for SAM without 
complications; 60% for 
SAM with complications; 
62% for MAM " 
$24.7 million

32 
ANNEX: Strat egic Objecti ves, indicators and targ ets 
Health 
RESPONSE TYPE INDICATORS BASELINE TARGET REQUIREMENTS ($) 
First Line Response Percentage decrease in the number of reported cases of 
cholera 
369,900 cases 295,200 cases 
(20% reduction) 
$493.5 million 
Second Line Response Percentage increase in the number of targeted health 
facilities providing the Minimum Service Packages (MSP) 
1,400 health 
facilities 
1,820 health facilities 
(30% increase) 
$72.2 million 
Full Cluster Response Percentage increase in the number of targeted people 
benefitting from the Minimum Service Package at all levels of 
care in priority districts 
8 million 10.4 million (30% 
increase) 
$61.5 million 
Water, Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH) 
RESPONSE TYPE INDICATORS BASELINE TARGET REQUIREMENTS ($) 
First Line Response Percentage decrease in the number of outbreaks of 
infectious diseases, including cholera 
369,000 cases 295,200 cases 
(20% reduction) 
$162 mil 
Second Line Response Percentage increase in the number of people in acute 
need with access to safe water and sanitation services 
12.6 million in acute 
need 
11 million 
(14% reduction) 
$73 mil 
Full Cluster Response Percentage increase in the number of upgraded 
water and sanitation systems 
522 1,247 
(138% increase) 
$50 mil 
Protection 
RESPONSE TYPE INDICATORS BASELINE TARGET REQUIREMENTS ($) 
First Line Response Percentage increase in the number of at-risk people who receive 
protection assistance or specialized services 
36% 26% $ 98.6 million 
Second Line Response Percentage increase in the number of volunteers trained 17% 30% $ 50.9 million 
Full Cluster Response Percentage increase in the number of priority communities where 
specialized services are available 
93% 93% $ 3.5 million 
Education 
RESPONSE TYPE INDICATORS BASELINE TARGET REQUIREMENTS ($) 
First Line Response Percentage increase in the number of functional schools 35% 60% $64 million 
Second Line Response Percentage increase in the number of children accessing 
and remaining in formal education 
75% 80% $33 million 
Full Cluster Response Percentage of teachers actively teaching at least 80% of 
school days 
65% 70% $8.4 million 
Shelter and Site Management 
RESPONSE TYPE INDICATORS BASELINE TARGET REQUIREMENTS ($) 
First Line Response Percentage increase in the number of underserved 
collective sites where the minimum 
service package is available 
11% 51% $206 million 
Second Line Response Percentage increase in the number of families 
benefitting from upgraded shelter 
0% 36% $2 million 
Full Cluster Response Percentage increase in the number of returnees 
living in adequate housing 
1% 10% $14 milion

33 
ANNEX: Strat egic Objecti ves, indicators and targ ets 
Refugees and Migrants Multi-Sector (RMMS) 
RESPONSE TYPE INDICATORS BASELINE TARGET REQUIREMENTS ($) 
First Line Response Number of persons of concern who returned to their countries of origin 3,548 13,000 
(266% increase) 
$91 million 
Second Line Response Percentage of persons of concern that benefited from at least one form of 
specialized assistance 
2,223 10,256 
(361% increase) 
$30.5 million 
* reflects January - November 2018 estimation 
Rapid Response Mechanism (RRM) 
RESPONSE TYPE INDICATORS BASELINE TARGET REQUIREMENTS ($) 
First Line Response Percentage increase in the number of newly displaced IDP 
and returnee households receiving RRM kits 
167,000 households 380,000 households 
(127% increase) 
$48.6 million 
Logistics 
RESPONSE TYPE INDICATORS BASELINE TARGET REQUIREMENTS ($) 
First Line Response Percentage increase in the number of humanitarian 
organizations using common logsitcs services 
80% 90% $ 58.5 million 
Second Line Response Percentage of increase in the volume of cargo handling 
capacity at key entry points 
NA 30% $10 million 
Emergency Telecomunications 
RESPONSE TYPE INDICATORS BASELINE TARGET REQUIREMENTS ($) 
First Line Response Percentage increase in the number of users reporting 
favourably on ETC services 
87% 90% $ 3.8 million 
Second Line Response Percentage increase in number of critical incidents 
reported to ETC helpdesks resolved within 24 hours 
70% 80% $ 1.7 million 
Coordination 
RESPONSE TYPE INDICATORS BASELINE TARGET REQUIREMENTS ($) 
First Line Response Percentage increase in the number of regularly 
accessible areas 
TBD in March 2019 based on latest data. $25 million 
Second Line Response Percentage increase in the number of national 
partners receiving funding through the YHRP 
40% 45% $1 million

This document is produced on behalf of the Humanitarian Country Team and partners. 
This document provides the Humanitarian Country Team’s shared understanding of the crisis, including the most pressing 
humanitarian need and the estimated number of people who need assistance. It represents a consolidated evidence base and helps 
inform joint strategic response planning. 
The designations employed and the presentation of material in the report do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever 
on the part of the Secretariat of the United Nations concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its 
authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. 
www.unocha.org/yemen 
www.ochayemen.org/hpc 
www.humanitarianresponse.info/en/operations/yemen 
@OCHAYemen

