UGANDA 
COUNTRY REFUGEE RESPONSE 
PLAN 
The integrated response plan for refugees from South Sudan, Burundi and the 
Democratic Republic of the Congo 
January 2019 — December 2020

CREDITS: 
UNHCR wishes to acknowledge the contributions of partners and staff in Uganda Office, Regional Service 
Center (RSC) - Nairobi and Headquarters who have participated in the preparation of the narrative, financial 
and graphic components of this document. 
Production: UNHCR, Regional Refugee Coordination Office (RRC), Nairobi, Kenya. 
The maps in this publication do not imply the expression of any opinion on the part of UNHCR concerning 
the legal status of any country or territory or area, of its authorities, or the delimitation of frontiers or 
boundaries. 
All statistics are provisional and subject to change. 
For more information: 
Burundi crisis go to: Burundi Information Sharing Portal 
South Sudan crisis go to: South Sudan Information Sharing Portal 
DRC crisis go to: DRC Information Sharing Portal 
Uganda refugees country page 
FRONT COVER PHOTOGRAPH: 
Thirteen-year-old South Sudanese refugee John Luis, from Juba, South Sudan, inside a classroom at 
Ofonze Primary School in Bidibidi refugee settlement, Yumbe District, Northern Region, Uganda 
© UNHCR / David Azia

U G A N DA R R P > JA N UA R Y 2 0 1 9 - D E C EMB E R 2 0 2 0 3 
Contents 
Uganda Refugee Response Plan 
Executive Summary 5 
Background and Achievements 6 
Planning Scenarios 9 
Needs Analysis 13 
Response Strategy & Priorities 30 
Partnership & Coordination 35 
Planned Response for 2019 & 2020 42 
Financial Requirements 52 
Annex 
Monitoring Framework 56 
2019 Financial Requirements Summary 66 
2020 Financial Requirements Summary 69 
.UGANDA COUNTRY RRP

E 
E 
E 
E 
E 
E 
E 
E E 
E 
E 
E 
E 
E 
E 
E 
E E
E 
E 
E 
E 
C 
CC 
C C
C
C 
G 
C 
C 
C 
C 
C
CC 
C
CC 
C 
C C 
CC 
C 
C 
C 
C 
C 
C 
C 
C 
C 
Nairobi 
Kigali 
Kampala 
Lake 
Albert 
Lake 
Turkana 
Lake 
Kivu 
Lake 
Edward 
Lake 
Victoria 
Kigali 
UNITED 
REPUBLIC OF 
TANZANIA 
DEMOCRATIC 
REPUBLIC OF 
THE CONGO 
KENYA 
RWANDA 
BURUNDI 
Lake 
Tanganyika 
Bujumbura 
UGANDA 
1,074,000 
South Sudanese 
539,000 
Congolese 
42,000 
Burundian 
450,000 
812,500 
1,175,000 
1,537,500 
1,900,000 
Oct.'15 Oct.'16 Oct.'17 Dec.'18 Dec.'19 Dec.'20 
Refugee Population Trends 2015 - 2020* (Source UNHCR, OPD) 
Refugee locations 
Projected Refugee by end Dec.’20 
G Urban refugee location 
Refugee transit centre / reception 
centre / collection point 
E
C Refugee settlement 
58 
766 
1.03B South Sudan 
situation 
DRC situation 
& Other 
Burundi 
Situation 
2019 and 2020 Requirements by Situation | in millions US$ 
UNITED 
REPUBLIC OF 
TANZANIA 
DEMOCRATIC 
REPUBLIC OF 
THE CONGO 
KENYA 
RWANDA 
BURUNDI 
SOUTH SUDAN 
2019- 2020 PLANNED RESPONSE 
1.73*M 
2019-2020 PROJECTED 
REFUGEE POPULATION 
US$ 1.86B 
2019 REQUIREMENTS 
61 
2019 & 2020 PARTNERS 
INVOLVED

U G A N DA R R P > JA N UA R Y 2 0 1 9 - D E C EMB E R 2 0 2 0 5 
Whilst seeking to meet humanitarian needs, the 2019- 
2020 RRP also serve as a transition plan towards 
sustainable refugee response programming in Uganda. 
As such, this plan contributes to achieving the 
Comprehensive Refugee Response Framework (CRRF) 
in Uganda, alongside interventions carried out by 
government institutions. 
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES 
Under the leadership and coordination of the 
Government, the Uganda 2019-2020 RRP aims at 
achieving the following objectives: 
•• Through to 2020, Uganda’s asylum space is 
maintained, equal and unhindered access to 
territory is preserved; 
•• The Government of Uganda owns protection 
processes that promote the full enjoyment of 
rights, and international protection standards; 
•• By 2020, the refugee response paradigm in 
Uganda has progressively shifted from care and 
maintenance to inclusion and self-reliance; 
•• By 2020, refugees progressively benefit from 
provision of inclusive basic social services; 
•• By 2020, refugees are well on their path to 
access durable solutions 
PRIORITY OUTCOMES 
Partners and sectors will be guided by the following 
priority outcomes for planning and programming: 
1. Refugee protection; 
2. Emergency response; 
3. Education; 
4. Environment; 
5. Livelihoods; 
6. Urban refugees. 
2019-2020 RRP’S INNOVATIONS 
The 2019-2020 RRP brings a number of novelties 
compared to previous RRPs, as follows: 
•• Two-year planning cycle; 
•• Disaggregated targets for host communities; 
•• Resilience interventions to support national 
systems to achieve integrated social service 
delivery; 
•• Sector strategies and priorities aligned to 
existing government sector response plans; 
•• Enhanced results framework to monitor the RRP 
performance; 
•• Sector needs analysis based on the 2018 joint 
inter-agency Multi-Sector Needs Assessment. 
Executive Summary 
Sectors South Sudan DRC and others Burundi Total 
Protection 29 19 7 31 
Education 16 10 1 17 
Environment & Energy 12 10 2 15 
Food Security 1 1 1 1 
Health & Nutrition 13 11 3 14 
Livelihood & Resilience 37 21 5 37 
Shelter, Settlement & NFI 9 11 2 11 
WASH 19 14 2 20 
Total 59 37 11 61 
Partners appealing for funds from non-UN sources 
* The baseline for this projection is based on a mix of OPM RIMS figures and verification data for settlements where verification had been completed 
as at June 2018, when the RRP planning process began. Sector targets and agency budgets for 2019 and 2020 have been developed based 
on this projection. In order to align the population planning figures, targets and budgets with the results of verification, this RRP will be revised in 
early 2019. 
Executive Summary - UGANDA COUNTRY RRP

6 UGANDA R R P > JANUARY 2 0 1 9 - D E C E M B E R 2 0 2 0 
Background and Achievements 
1 UNHCR, 2017 Global Trends Report: http://www.unhcr.org/5b27be547 
2 The baseline for this projection is based on a mix of OPM RIMS figures and verification data for settlements where verification had been 
completed as at June 2018, when the RRP planning process began. Sector targets and agency budgets for 2019 and 2020 have been developed 
based on this projection. In order to align the population planning figures, targets and budgets with the results of verification, this RRP will be 
revised in early 2019. 
Overview 
Over one million refugees have fled to Uganda in the last two and a half years, making the Pearl of Africa the third 
largest refugee-hosting country in the world after Turkey and Pakistan1, with 1.36 million refugees by June 2018. 
Wars, violence and persecution in the Horn of Africa and Great Lakes Region were the main drivers of forced 
displacement into Uganda, led by South Sudan’s conflict, insecurity and ethnic violence in the Democratic Republic 
of the Congo (DRC) and political instability and human rights violations in Burundi. 
South Sudanese make up the largest refugee population in Uganda (985,512 people) as at June 2018, followed by 
refugees from the DRC (271,967) and Burundi (36,677). Another 70,988 refugees from Ethiopia, Eritrea, Rwanda, 
Somalia and Sudan have lived in protracted exile in Uganda for the past three decades. 
More than 60 percent of Uganda’s refugees are under the age of 18, one of the most visible consequences of 
conflicts in neighboring countries - and with clear implications for the provision of protection services. 
Twelve of Uganda’s 121 districts host the overwhelming majority of refugees. About 92 percent live in settlements 
alongside the local communities, mainly in northern Uganda or West Nile (Adjumani, Arua, Koboko, Moyo, Lamwo 
and Yumbe) with smaller numbers in central Uganda or Mid West (Kiryandongo and Hoima) and southern Uganda or 
South West (Kyegegwa, Kamwenge and Isingiro). Urban centres are home to eight percent of the refugee population, 
especially Kampala. 
With expected refugee influxes from the DRC (140,000), South Sudan (70,000) and Burundi (7,000) throughout the 
period covered by the RRP, Uganda is likely to host about 1.74 and 1.73 million refugees by the end of 2019 and 2020 
respectively2. These figures also factor about 138,000 returns to DRC (30,000), South Sudan (100,000) and Burundi 
(8,000) over the same time period. 
Achievements and challenges 
Border and protection monitoring along the Ugandan 
borders ensured that 121,682 new refugee arrivals were 
provided with reception assistance and transferred to 
settlements in the first semester of 2018. Among them 
were 30,954 refugees from South Sudan, 88,737 from 
the DRC and 1,991 from Burundi. No case of refoulment 
was reported in 2018. 
Bac kground and Achievements - UGANDA COUNTRY RRP

CRRF AND UGANDA’S REFUGEE POLICY 
The Comprehensive Refugee Response Framework (CRRF), formally launched in March 2017, embraces existing 
initiatives, mechanisms and policies seeking to address the needs of refugee and host communities in Uganda. 
Uganda’s favourable protection environment for refugees is grounded in the 2006 Refugee Act and the 2010 
Refugee Regulations. These legislations allow refugees freedom of movement, the right to work, establish a business, 
own property and access national services, including primary and secondary education and health care. 
South Sudanese and Congolese asylum seekers are granted refugee status on a prima facie basis, while refugees 
from other nationalities undergo Refugee Status Determination (RSD) interviews with the Refugee Eligibility 
Committee, an inter-ministerial body. Prima facie refugee status determination for Burundian was revoked in May 
2017 and entered into force on 1 June 2017. 
Through its Settlement Transformative Agenda (STA), Uganda pursues a non-encampment policy to refugee 
protection and assistance. Refugees are provided with a plot of land for housing and cultivation and can settle 
alongside their host communities. 
The CRRF seeks to advance Uganda’s STA, embedded into the National Development Plan II (NDP II, 2016-2021), 
including through the implementation of the humanitarian refugee response (emergencies and protracted situations) 
and development-oriented interventions like the Refugee and Host Populations Framework (ReHoPE), under the 
United Nations Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF). CRFF’s long-term goal is sustainability of STA and 
inclusion of refugees into national and local development plans. 
A multi-stakeholder CRRF Steering Group, co-chaired by the Office of the Prime Minister (OPM) and the Ministry of 
Local Government (MoLG), supports the practical application of CRFF, with technical support from the CRRF 
Secretariat. The CRRF Steering Group consists of 32 members from Line Ministries, Government Departments and 
Agencies, Local Governments, development and humanitarian donors, representatives of UN Agencies, national and 
international NGOs, the private sector and international financial institutions. 
In January 2018, the CRRF Steering Group adopted a roadmap, with milestones and priority interventions for refugee 
stakeholders between 2018 and 2020 bridging the gap between NDP II and NDP III. Creating entry points for nontraditional 
refugee responders in Uganda, the roadmap highlights the following priority focus areas: adaptation and 
standardization of refugee response and protection based on lessons learned; access to quality education for 
refugee and host communities; water delivery and infrastructure; environment and energy; health care; and 
livelihoods, resilience and self-reliance. 
For the first time in Uganda’s history, national and local development plans will include refugee issues. In March 2018, 
the Ministry of Education introduced its Education Response Plan (2018-2021) with the aim to respond to the 
additional strains placed on the educational system in refugee-hosting districts. Following this lead, the Ministry of 
Health and the Ministry of Water and Environment have also begun developing integrated response plans, due for 
release in the second half of 2018 and early 2019 respectively.

8 UGANDA R R P > JANUARY 2 0 1 9 - D E C E M B E R 2 0 2 0 
The Office of the Prime Minister (OPM) continued to 
undertake registration and documentation of refugees. 
Following serious allegations of fraud and corruption 
within the refugee response, UNHCR and WFP reached 
out to the Government in late 2017 to seek cooperation 
in addressing growing concerns about the accuracy and 
reliability of refugee data used for fundraising, 
programming and of assistance. 
In response, the government and UNHCR launched a 
verification of all refugees in Uganda in March 2018, 
using UNHCR biometric systems. More than 515,000 
refugees were verified as of June, including 359,798 
South Sudanese, 104,305 Congolese and 26,623 
Burundians, with verification continuing until the end 
October 2018. 
Furthermore, a memorandum of understanding between 
UNHCR and the Government of Uganda, signed in mid 
2018, enabled OPM to use UNCHR’s enhanced 
biometric systems to register refugees. 
In the settlements, refugees continued to receive 
monthly food rations, household items and access to 
multi-sectoral services, in addition to a plot of land for 
housing and farming. 
Following the sudden and mass refugee influx from 
DRC’s Ituri province in late December 2017, several 
transit and reception centres were built or expanded in 
2018. This includes construction of Nyakabande’s new 
transit centre (Kisoro district) and Matanda transit centre 
(Kanungu district); refurbishment and repair of 
Bubukwanga transit centre (Bundibugyo district); and 
expansion of Kyaka II and Kyangwali reception centres. 
Furthermore, six new settlement areas were opened in 
Kyangwali (four) and Kyaka II (two) to provide land and 
shelter for new refugee arrivals from the DRC. 
RRP partners opened 72 kilometres of access roads in 
Kyangwali and Kyaka II and rehabilitated another 43 
kilometres of district roads in Hoima and Kyegegwa to 
ease relocation and settlement of new arrivals. In 
northern Uganda, 3.2 kilometres of roads were opened 
in Rhino, while another 25.4 kilometers of existing roads 
were rehabilitated and maintained in Rhino and Imvepi 
(10.4 km) and Adjumani settlements (15 km). 
Partners continued to support the national health care 
system as well as health facilities and referral services in 
and around refugee settlements, helping maintain the 
crude mortality rate and under five mortality rate at 0.1 
death every 1,000 people per month – below the 
non-emergency standard of 1 death every 1,000 people 
per month. 
Due to cholera and Ebola outbreaks in the DRC in 2018, 
RRP partners in coordination with the Ministry of Health 
deployed resources to strengthen screening measures 
at entry points and expand traditional and communitybased 
disease surveillance systems. 
In the first six months of 2018, supply of safe drinking 
water was maintained at 16 liters per person per day 
(l/p/d) across the refugee response. About 14 percent of 
water was provided through water trucking in 
settlements hosting South Sudanese and 98.8 percent 
in settlements hosting Congolese and Burundians. 
Building on existing complaint mechanisms, partners 
launched in October 2018 an inter-agency centralised 
refugee feedback, complaint and resolution mechanism 
to enhance accountability to affected populations. 
In line with the Grand Bargain’s commitment to improve 
joint and impartial needs assessments, a joint interagency 
multi-sector needs assessment of refugee and 
host communities was carried out in 12 refugee-hosting 
Bac kground and Achievements - UGANDA COUNTRY RRP

U G A N DA R R P > JA N UA R Y 2 0 1 9 - D E C EMB E R 2 0 2 0 9 
districts and 30 refugee settlements to provide 
evidence-based data for the development of the 2019- 
2020 RRP. 
The level of funding for the refugee response in Uganda 
reached an all time low this year, with only 42 percent of 
earmarked and unearmarked contributions received as 
of October 2018. While the number of refugees per 
1,000 inhabitants has tripled to 35 since 2016 –putting a 
huge pressure on local resources and services, external 
aid has been progressively dwindling over the years, 
causing major gaps in the refugee response. RRP 
partners continued to face enormous challenges in 
stabilising existing programmes and often meeting the 
3 UNDP, 2016 HDR Report: http://hdr.undp.org/en/composite/MPI#a. 
4 http://www.ipcinfo.org/fileadmin/user_upload/ipcinfo/docs/IPC_SouthSudan_AcuteFI_2018Sept_March2019.pdf 
minimum standards of service provision, let alone 
investing in long-term and more sustainable 
interventions. 
Severe underfunding has particularly compromised the 
quality of child protection and education services and 
limited investments in prevention and response to 
Sexual and Gender-Based Violence (SGBV), 
environmental protection, support for host communities, 
and permanent community infrastructure. With 34 
percent of its population below income poverty line (US 
$1.9 per person per day3), Uganda may be unable to fully 
realize a comprehensive refugee response and maintain 
its progressive refugee policy without adequate support 
from the international community. 
Planning Scenarios 
SOUTH SUDAN 
The parties to the conflict in South Sudan signed a Declaration of Agreement on 27 June and a subsequent powersharing 
deal on 5 August in Khartoum, committing to a permanent ceasefire and the formation of a government of 
national unity. While this represents a positive development in the peace process, the refugee influx from South 
Sudan is likely to continue through to 2020 due to ongoing political crisis, insecurity and declining economy, though 
at lower rates compared to recent years. 
The country’s growth domestic product (GDP) per capita in 2014 was US $1,111 dropping to less than US $200 in 2017. 
Inflation stood at 122.9 percent in July 2018 and the South Sudanese pound (SSP) continued to depreciate trading at 
approximately 144.8 per US Dollar (USD) in August 2018 - compared to 50 per USD before July 2016 conflict. 
Based on the Integrated Food Security Phase Classification (IPC) analysis for September 2018-March 20194, an 
estimated 3.73 million people would face Crisis (IPC Phase 3) another 1.47 million Emergency (IPC Phase 4). Hunger 
and food insecurity may contribute to drive displacement into Uganda, especially among the 650,000 people 
estimated to be highly food insecure in South Sudan’s bordering regions with Uganda, namely West, Central and 
Eastern Equatoria. 
Planning Scenarios - UGANDA COUNTRY RRP

10 UGANDA R R P > JANUARY 2 0 1 9 - D E C E M B E R 2 0 2 0 
Uganda is expected to host 1.11 million refugees from South Sudan in 2019 and 1.07 million in 2020, with 50,00 new 
refugee arrivals in 2019 and 20,000 in 2020. This plan foresees that about 20,000 refugees may spontaneously 
return home in 2019 and up to 80,000 in 2020, provided that the prospects for a sustainable peace become more 
tangible. 
DRC 
Refugee outflows into Uganda are likely to continue in 2019 and 2020 due to unrest and widespread human rights 
violations in North Kivu as well as inter-community and inter-ethnic violence in Ituri. The nexus between political and 
sectarian violence will remain a key feature of the DRC’s political instability, whereby a deeper political crisis is likely 
to revive and galvanize armed groups and militias across the country. At least 70 armed groups operate in Eastern 
DRC, close to the border with Uganda, and have a long history of atrocious attacks on civilians, including killings, 
abductions and rape. Among them are the Allied Democratic Forces/National Army for the Liberation of Uganda 
(ADF/NALU), the March 23 Movement (M23) and the Mayi Mayi groups. 
While President Kabila announced on 7 August he would not stand in the election scheduled for 23 December 2018, 
the polls remain highly contentious and may exacerbate existing political and ethnic tensions, leading to a new crisis 
©UNHCR / MICHELE SIBILON 
Planning Scenarios - UGANDA COUNTRY RRP

U G A N DA R R P > JA N UA R Y 2 0 1 9 - D E C EMB E R 2 0 2 0 11 
and renewed refugee outflows. The presidential candidate submitted by the ruling coalition, former Interior Minister 
Ramazani Shandary – Kabila’s long-time right-hand man, is believed to have no power network of his own or 
influence in the military, with president Kabila continuing to pull the strings from behind the scenes. 
On 1 August, the DRC Minister of Health declared a new Ebola virus outbreak in North Kivu, which quickly spread to 
Ituri. Ongoing conflict and armed activities of militia groups in these areas make the response to the outbreak 
extremely challenging. Without access to health care or treatment in the Ebola-affected areas, there is a risk that 
infected patients or Congolese fearing infection may use refugee routes into Uganda to seek medical attention. 
Food insecurity in the DRC may marginally contribute to refugee outflows into Uganda, especially from Ituri. 
Interethnic violence in Djugu and Imuru territories has led to a disruption of the agricultural system, resulting in 
significant loss of harvest. In the likelihood of meagre harvest seasons, more Congolese will cross to Uganda in 
search of a food. 
Some 100,000 new refugee arrivals are expected to cross to Uganda in 2019 and 40,000 others in 2020, bringing 
the DRC refugee population to approximately 509,000 in 2019 and 539,000 in 2020. Should political tensions 
defuse and security improve in North Kivu and Ituri, return to the country of origin may become a reality, though 
marginal in scope. This plan puts the number of expected returns to 10,000 in 2019 and 20,000 for the following 
year. 
BURUNDI 
The situation in Burundi is expected to remain calm but unpredictable in 2019, with a trickle of refugees likely to 
continue throughout the year due to threats and abuses by members of the Imbonerakure militia, but also 
deteriorating economy. 
On 17 May 2018, 73 percent of voters casted their ballot for “yes” in a Constitutional referendum that resolved to 
boost the powers of President Pierre Nkurunziza. The new Constitution was promulgated on 7 June, and although 
President Nkurunziza announced that he would not re-run for office after his term, the ‘yes’ win could potentially 
allow him to stay in office until 2034. The opposition and human rights organizations said that the constitution’s 
revision goes against the Arusha accords adopted in 2000 to end a 13-year civil war in Burundi and weakens the 
mechanisms to protect the Tutsy minority in a Hutu-majority country. 
The political crisis has heavily affected the Burundian economy, with GDP dropping in 2015 and 2016 and hitting a 
zero growth in 2017. The inflation rate increased from 5.5 percent in 2016 to 18 percent in 2017, contributing to 
deteriorating food insecurity. 
Burundi’s next presidential elections, scheduled for 2020, have the potential to generate violence and further 
precipitate the existing economic crisis, leading to displacement within and outside the country, including to Uganda. 
Planning Scenarios - UGANDA COUNTRY RRP

12 UGANDA R R P > JANUARY 2 0 1 9 - D E C E M B E R 2 0 2 0 
A minor secondary refugee movement from Tanzania cannot be excluded should government policies towards 
Burundian refugees become more restrictive. 
Uganda is expected to host some 43,000 Burundian refugees by the end of 2019 and about 42,000 by the end of 
2020, with 5,000 new refugee arrivals in 2019 and 2,000 others in 2020. The return of refugees remains high on 
Burundi’s agenda, but its capacity to absorb returns is low. While no Burundian refugees in Uganda have so far 
expressed any intention to return home, it is expected that about 4,000 people may spontaneously return home in 
2019 and 4,000 others in 2020. The operation will continue to monitor the situation and look into providing support 
to those wishing to go back home. 
Beneficiary Population 
The base refugee population includes 1.36 million individuals, based on OPM-UNHCR verification findings for 
settlements where verification was completed, and OPM Refugee Information Management System (RIMS) data for 
settlements where verification is ongoing, all of as of June 2018. The refugee population is anticipated to grow to 
1.73 million individuals by the end of 2020, taking into account likely scenarios for influxes, population growth, and 
possible opportunities for voluntary return in safety and dignity. 
Population as of 
end of December 
2018 
Planned Population 
as of end of 2019 
Planned Population as of end of 
2020 
South Sudan 1,060,809 1,112,025 1,074,266 
DRC and other refugees 583,551 583,222 614,887 
Burundi 41,402 43,230 42,094 
Total 1,585,762 1,738,477 1,731,246 
Host populations in refugeehosting 
sub counties 2,236,973 2,304,506 2,351,313 
Grand Total 3,822,735 4,042,983 4,082,559 
Planning Scenarios - UGANDA COUNTRY RRP

U G A N DA R R P > JA N UA R Y 2 0 1 9 - D E C EMB E R 2 0 2 0 13 
Concerning the Ugandan hosting community, the RRP will primarily target populations in 43 refugee-hosting subcounties 
with a total population of 2.35 million individuals anticipated by 2020. Communities and individuals in 
refugee-hosting sub-counties will benefit from assistance along specific targeting criteria, different for each sector, 
and to the extent that resources permit. Entire refugee-hosting districts may also benefit from system-level 
interventions. 
Needs Analysis 
The needs analysis underpinning this RRP is broken down by sector and is is based on government sector response 
plans, where available (Education, Health, WASH) and the findings of the 2018 joint inter-agency MSNA, which was 
purposely carried out to inform this plan. Other existing needs assessments and studies have been used to provide 
further evidence on needs and gaps. 
PROTECTION 
Despite Uganda’s favourable protection environment, refugees are faced with numerous protection challenges due 
to the magnitude of displacement and growing vulnerabilities, compounded by diminishing resources and strained 
social services in refugee-hosting districts. 
Reception, registration and refugee status determination - Limited capacities of border authorities and reception 
staff, as well as shortfalls in coordination among key partners create delays and backlogs in registration and issuance 
of documentation. 
In order to reduce the lengthy processing time for asylum seekers awaiting refugee status determination (RSD), there 
is a need to strengthen the capacity and accelerate the work of the Refugee Eligibility Committee (REC), an interministerial 
body in charge of RSD for asylum seekers who fall outside the prima facie recognition. The Refugee 
Appeals Board (RAB) also needs support to be able to review on a more regular basis the cases of asylum seekers 
rejected at first instance. 
Additional human resources, equipment and better Internet connectivity are needed to address delays in registration 
in most locations. When asylum seekers and refugees fail to be timely registered, they may be unable to access 
certain services or experience delayed service provision. 
Mechanisms and pathways allowing refugees to report complaints and receive feedback in the areas of reception, 
verification, registration and RSD are limited and need to be strengthened and better coordinated. 
Needs Analys is - UGANDA COUNTRY RRP

14 UGANDA R R P > JANUARY 2 0 1 9 - D E C E M B E R 2 0 2 0 
Persons with specific needs (PSN) - While over 103,000 refugees have been identified as persons with specific 
needs5 as of June 2018, many more will require targeted protection services and support by the end of 2020. 
Among them are unaccompanied and separated children, women, children and older persons at risk, persons with 
disabilities and serious medical conditions, and persons carrying trauma. Community outreach and mobilization need 
to be further strengthened as to enable communities to effectively play an active role in their own protection. 
Psychosocial interventions for trauma survivors require significant investments, especially for refugees who were 
directly or indirectly exposed to extreme violence, lost family members or witnessed the destruction of their homes. 
According to 2018 joint inter-agency MSNA, at the national level 22 percent of refugee households reported that at 
least one member was scared or in psychological distress, with the highest percentage (46 percent) in Isingiro 
district (hosting mostly DRC and Burundi refugees). Out of these households, 40 percent reported that the family 
member in psychological distress was unable to access psychosocial care, with 77 percent in Kiryandongo district 
and 69 percent in Moyo district (both hosting South Sudan refugees). 
Access to justice - Refugees face significant challenges in accessing justice, especially in remote areas where the 
presence of the judiciary and police is limited or non-existent. In most settlements the number of police officers is 
inadequate to respond to the needs of an increasing population, especially female police officers – which represents 
a barrier for female refugees to come forward and report SGBV incidents. Lack or inadequate transportation and 
poor access to communication means are additional challenges facing the police deployed in refugee settlements 
across Uganda. 
Coexistence between communities - Tensions exist between the host communities, long-term refugees and new 
arrivals due to competition over decreasing resources (firewood, water, land) and the real or perceived belief of 
unequal access to services. Inter-ethnic tensions among refugee communities are also a concern and reflect the 
configuration of group power back in their countries of origin. Nevertheless, conflict-prevention and peace education 
programmes remain significantly under-resourced and require substantial investments as part of a strategy to 
prepare refugees to return home in the long run. 
Civilian character of asylum - There are concerns that combatants from various armed groups may enter Uganda 
through refugee flows, compromising the civilian character of asylum and refugee settlements and potentially 
leading to incidents of forced recruitment, child abuse, SGBV and inter-communal tensions. Existing policies and 
practices on separation, internment, demobilization and rehabilitation of former combatants need to be further 
strengthened. 
Child Protection - Children represent 60 percent6 of refugees and asylum seekers in Uganda. Before, during and 
after flight refugee children face serious protection risks, including family separation, physical, sexual and genderbased 
violence, psychosocial distress, child labour and other forms of violence. According to the 2018 joint interagency 
MSNA, households in both refugee (12 percent) and host communities (14 percent) reported having children 
5 Data from proGres v4 and outcomes of most recent PSN assessment exercises. 
6 UNHCR Uganda Operation Country Statistics, RIMS, June 2018. 
Needs Analys is - UGANDA COUNTRY RRP

U G A N DA R R P > JA N UA R Y 2 0 1 9 - D E C EMB E R 2 0 2 0 15 
who had experienced violence. Among refugee households, the highest level of violence was reported in some of 
the districts hosting South Sudanese refugees, namely Kiryandongo (19 percent), Lamwo (17 percent) and Yumbe (17 
percent)7. As for host community households, the highest level of violence against children was reported in Isingiro 
district (30 percent). 
The 2018 joint inter-agency MSNA highlights teenage pregnancy, defilement, child neglect, corporal punishment, 
mistreatment and neglect of fostered children as common amongst all population groups8. With a weak community 
child protection system, children are struggling to cope and to adapt to the new circumstances in the country of 
asylum. Poor psychosocial functioning among children is increasingly manifested in behavioural and conduct 
disorders. 
There are currently 29,295 unaccompanied and separated children9 (UASC) in Uganda. The joint inter-agency MSNA 
report identified that a higher number of refugee households has vulnerable children (orphans, unaccompanied, 
separated) than host community households. More host community and refugee households in districts hosting 
South Sudanese refugees were identified to have vulnerable children than in districts hosting refugees from DRC, 
Burundi and other nationalities. There is limited access to child protection services, with 68 percent of refugee and 
84 percent of host community households with vulnerable children across Uganda reporting having children in need 
of adequate services10. 
Sexual and Gender Based Violence (SGBV) - With significant numbers of women and children, the refugee 
populations in Uganda are highly vulnerable to SGBV, including persons with specific needs (PSNs). 
In both South Sudan and DRC, sexual violence has been used as a weapon of war, including rape. Many have 
experienced sexual abuse, torture and separation from family members before or during flight. 
For SGBV incidents that occurred before or during flight, survivors have little or no chance to effectively pursue legal 
redress. Emotional and psychological trauma is common among refugees who have experienced violence or have 
witnessed violence perpetrated against family or community members. 
SGBV also occurs in Uganda, affecting both new refugee arrivals and long-term refugees. In addition to the 3,021 
SGBV survivors identified and assisted as of June 2018 (1,769 from South Sudan, 1,196 from the DRC and 56 from 
Burundi), many more are expected to be needing support by the end of 2020 as a result of anticipated refugee 
influxes and improved identification and reporting mechanisms. 
The most reported SGBV incident among South Sudanese refugees was physical assault (44 percent), followed by 
psychological violence (24 percent), rape (11 percent), forced and early marriage (7 percent) and sexual assault (6 
percent). 
7 UNHCR/REACH Joint Multi-Sector Needs Assessment, 2018. 
8 Preliminary report on the Joint Interagency Assessment on measures, mechanism and services for protection of women and children 
conducted in refugee settlements in Uganda, 2018 
9 UNHCR Uganda Factsheet Child Protection, June 2018. 
10 UNHCR/REACH Joint Multi-Sector Needs Assessment, 2018. 
Needs Analys is - UGANDA COUNTRY RRP

16 UGANDA R R P > JANUARY 2 0 1 9 - D E C E M B E R 2 0 2 0 
Rape ranks as the most prevalent form of SGBV (36 percent) among refugees from the DRC, followed by physical 
violence (23 percent), psychosocial abuse (18 percent), forced marriage (6 percent) and sexual assault (5 percent). 
Most of the rape incidents occurred in the country of origin and were reportedly perpetrated by militia groups. 
The most common forms of SGBV affecting Burundian refugees were physical assault, rape, sexual assault and 
emotional abuse. 
Intimate partner violence is the prevailing form of SGVB amongst the incidents occurred in Uganda. 
According to 2018 joint inter-agency MSNA, out of 37 percent of refugee households who self-rated the safety and 
security of their current location as less than good, 15 percent cited SGBV as a reason for insecurity. The highest 
percentages were reported in Koboko (50 percent), Kamwenge (29 percent) and Moyo (33 percent), with the first two 
districts hosting refugees from the DRC and the latter refugees from South Sudan. 
One of the contributing factors to SGBV is shift in the traditional power balance within households, with an increasing 
number of women becoming the main or sole breadwinner at home. Whilst leading to increased SGBV within 
domestic walls, the increasing disempowerment of men have also caused them to be more exposed to emotional 
and psychological violence. 
© UNHCR / JORDI MATAS 
Needs Analys is - UGANDA COUNTRY RRP

U G A N DA R R P > JA N UA R Y 2 0 1 9 - D E C EMB E R 2 0 2 0 17 
Denial of resources (e.g. food, household items, money), limited access to post-primary education and livelihood 
opportunities act as aggravating factors in the incidence of SGVB. Scarcity of food remains a key cause for intimate 
partner violence. Women and children are at heightened risk of assault when travelling to remote and isolated areas 
for collection of firewood and water or walking through communal areas with inadequate lighting. 
Although illegal according to Uganda laws, child, early and forced marriages are prominent and socially accepted 
among the refugees. It has been reported that underage girls are often taken back to South Sudan to be married off 
and return to Uganda only after marriage. 
A growing number of lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and inter-sex (LGBTI) individuals from refugee-producing 
countries, especially DRC, need focussed attention. This category of asylum seekers not only are not granted 
refugee status in Uganda, but also face low tolerance and acceptance among the members of the public, and hence 
insecurity. 
Underreporting of SGBV cases remains a major concern, due to a variety of factors including fear of stigma, shame, 
family reaction and dissolution, perception of SGBV as a private matter, or lack of confidence in reporting channels. 
Prevention and response services are not adequate to effectively address the protection needs of a growing 
population, with many SGBV survivors relying on community structures that often re-victimized them instead of 
serving their interest. Delays in accessing justice and limited human and financial resources are huge challenges to 
the provision of quality and effective services. 
EDUCATION 
Uganda is expected to host 1,58 million refugees by year-end 2018, including about 517,000 children of primary and 
secondary school age. With 217,000 new refugee arrivals anticipated by the end of 2020, another 130,200 pupils will 
need pre to post-primary education services, putting a further strain on the already stretched capacity of national and 
district-level education systems – and compromising both access to and quality of education service delivery. 
Currently, 53 percent of the primary-aged and 92 percent of the secondary-aged children are out of school, and an 
average of 22 percent are enrolled in grades lower than expected for their age. Host community enrolments are 
equally striking: a gross enrolment rate of 120 percent at primary level shows incidences of over and under-age 
enrolment, while an 18 percent low enrolment rate at secondary level indicates critical gaps. These are compounded 
by high drop-out rates at all levels and alarming indicators at primary level such as 154 pupils per classroom ratio and 
85 pupils per teacher11. 
Findings from the 2018 joint inter-agency MSNA, reinforced by additional references, point to a number of critical 
factors preventing refugee and host community children in Uganda from accessing a quality education. 
11 Ministry of Education and Sports: Education Response Plan for Refugees and Host Communities in Uganda (Aug 2018, approved but 
pending final review and sign-off). 
Needs Analys is - UGANDA COUNTRY RRP

18 UGANDA R R P > JANUARY 2 0 1 9 - D E C E M B E R 2 0 2 0 
Out of the refugee households that reported having at least one child out of school, 36 percent in Koboko (district 
hosting DRC refugees) and 32 percent in Lamwo (district hosting South Sudanese refugees) cited child marriage as a 
barrier to girls’ education. Host community households with at least one child out school also reported child marriage 
as a reason for girls being out of school, with 12 percent in Yumbe and 10 percent in Adjumani and Lawmo. 
The highest prevalence of child marriage is in northern Uganda, where the majority of the refugee-hosting districts 
are located12. A 2016 survey indicates that as many as three in ten Ugandan girls have their first child before their 
18th birthday; and more than a third marry before they turn 1813. Early marriage and pregnancy lead to girls dropping 
out of school, unlikely to ever return. Non-formal education pathways such as catch up classes and accelerated 
education programmes, are entry points of return to formal education for these girls but need to be part of a more 
holistic package of interventions to mitigate the protection risks for adolescent girls from both refugee and host 
communities. 
Although Uganda’s Universal Primary Education policy stipulates free compulsory primary education of good quality 
for all children, ‘hidden costs’ to accessing education remain. Financial constraints are among the main hindrances to 
educational enrolment and retention in schools, with parents compelled to cover the costs of scholastic materials, 
school uniforms and examination fees. According to the 2018 joint inter-agency MSNA, out of the households with at 
least one child out of school, 31 percent of refugee households and 45 percent of host community households 
consider the cost of education a prohibitive one. Of them, 54 percent of refugee households and 95 percent of host 
community households cited tuition fees as the highest unaffordable expenditures related to education, with refugee 
children more likely to access scholarships or tuition subsidies from humanitarian organizations compared to 
Ugandan children14. 
Low enrolment and attendance, and high dropout rates among children and youth can also be attributed to language 
barriers. While the South Sudanese primary school curriculum is in English and has some similarities to the Ugandan 
primary school curriculum, refugees from Burundi, DRC and other Francophone countries face challenges in 
adjusting to a new curriculum in a foreign language15. The 2018 joint inter-agency MSNA found that the highest 
percentage of households with school-age children where at least one child is not attending school are in districts 
hosting refugees from Francophone countries such as DRC and Burundi, namely Kyegegwa (46 percent), Hoima (33 
percent), Kamwenge (32 percent) and Isingiro (22 percent). Other studies confirm the low attendance rates of 
Congolese children in the same districts16. In the multi-linguistic setting of refugee-hosting areas, support to mothertongue 
literacy, language bridging courses, community involvement in schools and engagement of bi-lingual teacher 
assistants in classrooms are highly needed to mitigate these critical challenges. 
The 2018 joint inter-agency MSNA shows that out of the households with at least one child out of school, 94 percent 
of refugee and 100 percent of host community households consider being ‘too young’ as a reason for their children 
12 UNICEF, Press Release, June 2016 . 
13 World Bank, Educating Girls: A Way of Ending Child Marriage and Teenage Pregnancy, December 2017; Uganda Demographic and 
Health Survey 2016 (UDHS) conducted by the Uganda Bureau of Statistics between June 1. 
14 UNHCR/REACH Joint Multi-Sector Needs Assessment. 
15 Ministry of Education and Sports: Education Response Plan for Refugees and Host Communities in Uganda / ERP (Aug 2018, approved 
but pending final review and sign-off). 
16 Development Pathways, ‘Analysis of Refugee Vulnerability in Uganda and Recommendations for Improved Targeting of Food Assistance’, 
April 2018 p.51. 
Needs Analys is - UGANDA COUNTRY RRP

© UNHCR / DUNIYA ASLAM KHAN

20 UGANDA R R P > JANUARY 2 0 1 9 - D E C E M B E R 2 0 2 0 
not attending school, with specific reference to children of pre-primary age, between 3 to 5 years. This belief could 
be one of other factors contributing to the low gross enrolment rates of children of pre-primary age in both refugee 
and host communities, at 39 percent and 19 percent respectively. A study on child poverty and deprivation in 
refugee-hosting areas in Uganda also found that being ‘too young’ (43.2 percent) as well as parental indifference 
(19.1 percent) as the most cited reasons by surveyed households for children of primary school age being out of 
school17. 
Persistently low enrolment and attendance rates for both refugee and host community children and youth can be 
found in post-primary education. The gross enrolment rate (GER) among refugee children stands at 11 percent for 
secondary education. Only 18 percent of Ugandan children of secondary school age living in refugee-hosting 
districts are enrolled in secondary education, which is lower than the national average of 27.1 percent. There are still 
sub-counties without a secondary school, including where refugees are hosted, and only 18 secondary schools in 
refugee-hosting districts in northern Uganda, including government, community and private schools 18. 
A key barrier for refugees to access secondary education is the lack of or non-acceptance of certification proving 
they have completed primary education in their home country. Other constraints include the long distance between 
home and the nearest school, and poor school facilities. According to the joint inter-agency MSNA, examination fees 
represent a prohibitive cost for secondary school-aged children, preventing them to transition from upper primary 
into secondary. There are some scholarship programmes available for high achieving students from vulnerable 
households, but the number of places is limited. 
ENERGY & ENVIRONMENT 
Refugees and hosts are mostly dependent on natural resources to meet their basic needs for cooking energy, 
materials for shelter and agricultural land. Some also generate income by selling biomass and non-wood forest 
products. In addition to leading to environmental degradation and reduced groundwater recharge and supply, these 
demands contribute to increased risk of SGBV for women and children whilst collecting fuel wood, to reduce food 
and nutrition security and to deplete sources of cooking fuel. The health risks associated with exposure to 
unmanaged solid waste remain a critical concern. Competition over diminishing natural resources has the potential 
to exacerbate tensions between refugee and host communities. 
Environmental screening has not been integrated in settlement planning, magnifying the risks of environmental and 
social hazards such as flooding, conflicts over land use and resource access, and loss of vegetation, wetlands and 
local watersheds. While every settlement requires an Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIA) as the 
basis for site-specific environmental management and site planning, ESIA have been officially undertaken only in 
refugee settlements in Rwamwanja and Arua districts, with Bidididi settlement currently underway. 
17 Child Poverty and Deprivation in Refugee-Hosting Areas: Evidence from Uganda 2018. Economic Policy and Research Centre, Cardiff 
University and UNICEF Uganda. 
18 ECHO, Education Monitoring Mission – Uganda report 2017. 
Needs Analys is - UGANDA COUNTRY RRP

U G A N DA R R P > JA N UA R Y 2 0 1 9 - D E C EMB E R 2 0 2 0 21 
Refugees are often settled in environmentally marginal locations with population densities up to ten times the 
national average. The demands on ecosystem services from rapid refugee influxes outpace planning and 
implementation of remedial measures. The recent influx from the DRC has placed significant pressure on forest 
resources especially around Kyaka II and Kyangwali settlements, while vegetation cover is greatly depleted in the 
north, especially around settlements in Adjumani, Yumbe and Arua. Land use conversion from forest cover to 
agricultural use is prevalent. The 2018 joint inter-agency MSNA found that there is a significant gap in knowledge of 
agroforestry principles where only 33 percent of refugee and 27 percent of host community households had training 
in good agricultural practices (GAP). 
While reforestation and afforestation efforts are underway, dedicated woodlots for fuel and agroforestry interventions 
are needed in all settlements at a much larger scale, including deliberate planning for management of planted trees 
for at least a year to improve survival rates. 
Uganda’s National Environment Act (1995) stipulates the establishment of district Environment Protection 
Committees to act as local regulatory, monitoring and feedback mechanisms, but only few exist today due to lack of 
resources. None of the refugee settlement across the country is integrated in existing Catchment Management 
Plans. 
Access to sustainable energy for sufficient and clean cooking, lighting and power remain key challenges in the 
refugee settlements and in Uganda at large. Energy for productive uses to support livelihood activities and 
appropriate technology for food preservation are scarcely available. Over 75 percent of refugees19 are without any 
renewable source of energy. 
According to the 2018 joint inter-agency MSNA, on average refugee and host community households own less than 
one light source and 1.5 light source per family respectively, with heavy reliance on low-quality fuels such as 
kerosene and firewood. As a result, the risk of indoor air pollution, respiratory tract infection, and eye diseases 
increase. Solar lanterns are inconsistently provided and some are sold for cash to meet other needs. Furthermore, a 
larger-scale solar street lights coverage is required to improve security and reduce the risks of SGBV. Market-based 
interventions to increase access to quality energy products are needed. 
The 2018 joint inter-agency MNSA shows that 93 percent of refugee and host community households depend on 
fuel wood energy for cooking, with only 45 percent of refugee and 20 percent of host community households 
reporting use of energy saving stoves. Distributed stoves are often unused and training is not provided to improve 
adoption. While constructed Lorena stoves tend to have better adoption, there is a need to expand manufacturing 
training programs for local artisans. There is low adoption and availability of alternative cooking fuels such as 
briquettes and biogas. 
Refugee households use on average 22 percent of their income for energy, with women and children spending 
12-24 hours a week for firewood collection. Firewood consumption in northern Uganda averages between 2.5-4.5 kg 
19 UNHCR, 2018 mid year report. 
Needs Analys is - UGANDA COUNTRY RRP

22 UGANDA R R P > JANUARY 2 0 1 9 - D E C E M B E R 2 0 2 0 
per person per day, with host communities being on the higher end of that range20. This means that at least 1.3 
million tonnes of firewood are needed every year to meet the firewood consumption needs of over 1.36 million 
refugees, equating to a yearly demand of nearly 20 5-year-old fast growing trees per individual. 
Energy efficiency and climate change mitigation need to be mainstreamed across sectors, especially through 
implementation of solar power and sustainable cooking energy. Similarly, all partners involved in the refugee 
response need to integrate environment mitigation measures with emergency preparedness, response, stabilization 
and empowerment measures across all the sectors. 
FOOD SECURITY 
Out of 1.36 million refugees in Uganda as of June 2018, 1.1 million were receiving food assistance in the settlements 
either in-kind or through cash transfers. 
According to the 2018 joint inter-agency MSNA, the highest percentage of refugee households classified as people 
with unmet needs within the Food Security sector were found in the Southwest (16 percent) hosting mainly refugees 
from DRC and Burundi, followed by West Nile (14 percent) and the Midwest (9 percent) hosting the majority of 
refugees from South Sudan. 
At national level, 18 percent of refugee households were found to have low food consumption score (poor or 
borderline), with 32 percent in Kyegegwa (hosting DRC refugees), 28 percent in Lamwo (hosting South Sudan 
20 GiZ, 2018; FAO, 2017. 
© UNHCR/ Jordi Matas 
Needs Analys is - UGANDA COUNTRY RRP

U G A N DA R R P > JA N UA R Y 2 0 1 9 - D E C EMB E R 2 0 2 0 23 
refugees) and 25 percent in Kamwenge (hosting DRC refugees). Households in Imvepi (9 percent) in Arua district 
and Kyaka II (9 percent) in Kyegegwa had the highest percentage of poor food consumption score across all 
assessed households. 
Sixty seven percent of refugee households reported insufficient access to food for all the members of the household 
in the 7 days prior to data collection and 72 percent reported non-governmental assistance to be the primary source 
of food. 
While 38 percent of refugee households reported agriculture as one of their primary sources of livelihoods, 70 
percent of refugee respondents reported to have access to land for cultivation during the most recent agricultural 
season. Among the latter, 73 percent reported that the land was not sufficient to provide food for the entire 
household. With anticipated refugee influxes through to 2020, it is likely that the reduction of available land for 
long-term cases will continue, including agricultural land. 
There is a need to standardize general across the refugee response in Uganda and increasingly roll out cash-based 
transfers for both general food assistance and livelihood and food-for-assets interventions. In order to respond to the 
different level of vulnerability of different refugee populations, food rations need to be diversified – and a plan will be 
conceived in 2019 to that effect. 
It remains critical for the Food Security sector to establish strong linkages with the Livelihood&Resilience sector to 
help promote refugee self-reliance, especially through agricultural interventions. Such cross-sector coordination is 
fundamental to design programmes that help refugees access markets, sell off surplus produce and, as a result 
diversify their diet and meet other needs (e.g. through Purchase for Progress programs). 
Additional food security and nutrition and market assessments are needed to help inform food assistance 
programming and link market support to food and cash-based interventions. 
With over 1.5 million refugees likely to be in need of food assistance by 2020, it is of paramount importance to 
ensure a healthy food pipeline throughout the RRP period in order to reduce the risk of malnutrition among refugees 
and their reliance on negative coping mechanisms to secure food. 
HEALTH & NUTRITION 
In view of achieving provision of integrated health services and equitable access for both refugee and host 
communities, there is an urgent need to strengthen the health care system at national, district and local level through 
investments and measures that enhance its capacity to respond to current needs and future shocks. 
With an increasing refugee population and anticipated refugee influxes through to 2020, the capacity and resources 
of primary healthcare institutions remain at a constant risk of being overstretched. In particular, refugees living in 
Needs Analys is - UGANDA COUNTRY RRP

24 UGANDA R R P > JANUARY 2 0 1 9 - D E C E M B E R 2 0 2 0 
urban areas and outside the settlements access government health facilities that have not planned for additional 
patient caseload, leading to increased workload on health workers, frequent shortage of medicines and out-ofpocket 
medication expenditures by both refugee and host communities during stock-out periods21. 
The 2018 joint inter-agency MSNA revealed that 51 percent of refugee and 17 percent of host community households 
were categorized as people in need in the health sector, with refugee households ranking as high as 64 percent in 
Mid West (hosting DRC and South Sudan refugees), 57 percent in South West (hosting DRC and Burundian refugees) 
and 49 percent in West Nile (hosting South Sudan refugees). 
At a district level, 71 percent of refugee household classified as “in need” in Kamwenge (hosting DRC refugees), 69 
percent in Kyegegwa (hosting DRC refugees), 61 percent in Yumbe (hosting South Sudan refugees) and 56 percent in 
Arua and Hoima (hosting respectively South Sudan and DRC refugees). The most vulnerable refugee households in 
need of health services (57 percent) were found in Kiryandongo (hosting South Sudan refugees). 
Both refugee (55 percent) and host community households (44 percent) reported lack of drugs at health facilities as 
the biggest challenge in accessing health services for those who sought treatment but were unable to receive it, with 
the highest percentage in West Nile (56 percent). Cost of medicines was also reported as a barrier to access health 
services for refugee (20 percent) and host community households (34 percent), with the highest percentage for 
refugee households in South West (36 percent) and West Nile for host community households (37 percent). 
Uganda’s current existing health care system consists of 100 service delivery points, of which only 63 percent are 
permanent, 64 percent are government-accredited and 56 percent require upgrading22. According to 2017 Health 
Information System (HIS) data, the number of consultation per clinician a day is 68 in settlements hosting Burundian 
refugees, 57 in settlements hosting DRC refugees and 50 in those hosting South Sudan refugees. There is a need to 
set up new additional health facilities in line with the government guidelines and enable them to deliver the full 
package of health interventions as per the universal health access package. This requires investments for staffing, 
medical and nutrition supplies, infrastructure, equipment, referral services as well as skills training of existing medical 
personnel. 
There is a need to strengthen reproductive health services across the refugee response to increase the number of 
deliveries attended by skilled health workers. As of June 2018, 92 maternal deaths were reported in average every 
100,000 live births, with 97 percent of deliveries attended by skilled personnel in settlements hosting Burundi 
refugees, 96 percent in settlements hosting DRC refugees and 94 percent in those hosting South Sudan refugees. 
There is need to expand family planning, adolescent sexual and reproductive health (ASRH), cervical cancer 
screening and comprehensive HIV/AIDS services. Currently, 14,732 refugees and host community members living 
with HIV/AIDS are receiving anti-retroviral treatment (ART), of which 35 percent are refugees and 65 percent local 
21 MoH HSIRRP, 2018. 
22 MoH HSIRRP, 2018. 
Needs Analys is - UGANDA COUNTRY RRP

U G A N DA R R P > JA N UA R Y 2 0 1 9 - D E C EMB E R 2 0 2 0 25 
Ugandans. The need for HIV/AIDS prevention and response interventions is extensive, given poor knowledge and 
awareness about HIV, sociocultural factors of HIV/AIDS-related stigma, inadequate provision and low uptake of HIV 
prevention and treatment services. 
Refugee-producing countries neighbouring Uganda and refugee-hosting areas inside Uganda are vulnerable to 
communicable disease outbreaks due to cross border movement, congestion, inadequate sanitation and geographic 
location of settlements. As part of the preparedness and response to cholera, meningitis and measles outbreaks and 
risk of Ebola, there is a need to strengthen infection prevention and control, strengthen surveillance, stock essential 
drugs and improve the capacity of health care providers to effectively respond to potential disease outbreaks, 
especially at district and local level. More efforts are needed to improve health facilities serving refugees and to 
facilitate their accreditation by the Ministry of Health. 
According to the 2017 Food Security and Nutrition Assessment (FSNA), the prevalence of Acute Global Malnutrition 
(GAM) remained at within the acceptable standard in settlements hosting refugees from South Sudan (10 percent), 
DRC (4 percent) and Burundi (4 percent), with Palabek settlement recording the highest rate (12.4 percent). However, 
a nutrition screening of Congolese new arrivals in 2018 through Mid-Upper Arm Circumference (MUAC) 
measurements showed that both GAM and Severe Acute Malnutrition (SAM) were above emergency thresholds, at 
11.2 percent and 2.5 percent respectively. 
As per WHO classification, anaemia among children aged 6-59 months was ‘high’ in most refugee settlements 
across Uganda, with Nakivale, Oruchinga and Kampala classified as ‘medium’. Anemia among non-pregnant women 
aged 15-49 years was ‘medium’ in all settlements but Palabek, which ranked ‘high’ at 47 percent. 
© UNHCR/ Jordi Matas 
Needs Analys is - UGANDA COUNTRY RRP

26 UGANDA R R P > JANUARY 2 0 1 9 - D E C E M B E R 2 0 2 0 
Against this backdrop, more efforts are needed to enhance targeted supplementary feeding programme, skills 
training for health workers in Infant and Young Child Feeding (IYCF) practices in emergencies and expand use of a 
newly introduced vaccine in the routine immunization. Preventive approaches to address acute malnutrition and 
micronutrient deficiencies are needed to complement the existing curative measures. 
LIVELIHOODS & RESILIENCE 
Despite Uganda’s progressive approach to refugee management, refugees living in settlements and their host 
communities remain vulnerable and at risk of recurring shocks. At least 80 percent of refugees in Uganda live below 
the international poverty line of US$ 1.9 per day23. According to the 2018 joint inter-agency MSNA, 26 percent of 
refugee households reported relying on humanitarian aid as a coping strategy to support family members in the 30 
days prior to data collection. 
The alarming rate of dependency of refugees in Nakivale settlement (67 percent) highlights the risk for refugees to 
become dependent on humanitarian assistance if interventions do not adequately focus on sustainable and resilient 
livelihoods going forward. FAO’s Resilience Index Measurement Analysis (RIMA) found that refugee households are 
less resilient than host community households due to low education levels, poor diversification of income sources, 
limited number of crops cultivated and productive assets24. Moreover, the recent vulnerability study found that the 
time refugees have spent in Uganda is not closely correlated with levels of vulnerability25. 
The joint inter-agency MSNA26 found that 51 percent of refugee and 14 percent of host community households are in 
need of livelihood support, with the highest percentage among refugee households in West Nile (55 percent). At 
district level, the greatest needs for livelihood support among refugee households are in Moyo (65 percent), Yumbe 
(60 percent), Arua (57 percent) and Kyegegwa (53 percent). 
Regarding the application of livelihood coping strategies27, refugees from the DRC and Burundi reported sales of 
more animals (non-productive than usual) as well as reduced essential non-food expenditures such as education and 
health. Kyangwali settlement recorded the highest percentage (25.2 percent) of consumption of seed stock held for 
next season as their livelihood coping strategy. 
Ninety-seven percent of host communities and 95 percent of refugees in northern Uganda reported to be engaged 
in crop production, while only 45 percent of host communities and 22 percent of refuges sell part of their produce28. 
Agriculture is the most commonly reported source of livelihoods for refugee (38 percent) and host community (84 
percent) households in the 30 days prior to data collection. However, across refugee-hosting districts agriculture is 
characterized by low production and productivity, high vulnerability to climate change and high post-harvest losses29. 
23 FAO and OPM. Food Security, Resilience and Well-being Analysis of Refugees and Host Communities in Northern Uganda. (2018) Rome. 
pg. 15. 
24 Idem, pg. 4. 
25 WFP, UNHCR and OPM. 2017. Analysis of Refugee Vulnerability in Uganda, pg.14 
26 UNHCR/REACH Joint Multi-Sector Needs Assessment, 2018. 
27 UNICEF, UNHCR, WFP and MoH. 2017. Food Security and Nutrition Assessment in Refugee Settlements, pg. 85 
28 FAO and OPM, pg. 13. 
29 WFP, UNHCR and OPM. 2017. Analysis of Refugee Vulnerability in Uganda 
Needs Analys is - UGANDA COUNTRY RRP

U G A N DA R R P > JA N UA R Y 2 0 1 9 - D E C EMB E R 2 0 2 0 27 
The joint inter-agency MSNA found that 70 percent of refugee and 91 percent of host community households had 
access to agricultural land in the most recent planting and harvesting season. However, 75 percent of refugee 
households in West Nile, 69 percent in South West and 60 percent in Mid West reported that land was insufficient to 
produce food for the entire households. 
Out of households who reported having access to agricultural land, 39 percent of refugee and 54 percent of host 
community households cited lack of seeds as the main reason for being unable to cultivate, followed by lack of tools 
(33 percent for refugee and 38 percent for host community households). Further, crop diseases such as the cassava 
mosaic disease, and infestations such as the Fall Armyworm present additional challenges to food security and 
income generation, as does the lack of adequate animal health services. 
For non-farm livelihoods, limited business support services, micro-credit and vocational skills training opportunities 
are key barriers to earning an income outside of agriculture. Only 2 percent of refugee households have managed to 
obtain salaried employment.30 Overall, 13 percent of refugees aged 15 years and above are classified as selfemployed 
and one in five households (20 percent) has at least one household member engaged in informal trade 
and services. However, most employment options offer low wages. Lack of documentation showing education and 
skills, language and lack of social networks represent key barriers to gaining employment for refugees 31. 
To stabilize livelihood and overcome the socio-economic empowerment disconnect, geographic and population 
differences need to be considered in the provision of livelihood support. When exploring different livelihood 
strategies, key factors linked to productive assets, knowledge, skills and aspirations need to further be considered as 
do market linkages and opportunities. 
SHELTER, SETTLEMENT AND NFIS 
About 217,000 new refugee arrivals expected through to 2020 will need household NFIs and emergency shelter 
support, as well as accommodation on shelter and agriculture plots in settlements. The modality for NFI deliveries 
may transition from in-kind kits to cash-based support, depending on the market economies and other contextspecific 
parameters. 
In order to facilitate the smooth relocation of new refugee arrivals from border entry points through to household 
shelter plots, the existing transit and reception centres will need ongoing construction maintenance, repairs, 
potential expansion and installation of energy-saving stoves. 
The existing refugee settlements require detailed plot mapping, led by the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban 
Development (MLHUD) and OPM, with involvement of Sub-County Area Land Committees (ALCs), in order to produce 
cadastral survey plans that are aligned with the local area physical development plans. These blueprints will inform 
the spatial redesign process, where necessary, to maximise sustainable land use, protect environmentally sensitive 
areas and improve livelihood opportunities for both refugees and hosts. 
30 Idem, pg 7 
31 WFP, UNHCR and OPM. 2017. Analysis of Refugee Vulnerability in Uganda, pg.13 
Needs Analys is - UGANDA COUNTRY RRP

28 UGANDA R R P > JANUARY 2 0 1 9 - D E C E M B E R 2 0 2 0 
The allocation of productive land for agriculture is essential to promoting resilient incomes and self-sustaining food 
security. To ensure a harmonised approach, any new settlement should be planned and mapped in accordance with 
the same land use management principles. 
The 2018 joint inter-agency MSNA results revealed that, on average, 21 percent of refugee and 33 percent of host 
community households do not have access to a market within walking distance. Furthermore, 38 percent of refugee 
and 50 percent of host community households reported facing problems accessing markets to buy or sell 
agricultural products or livestock in the last 30 days prior to the survey32. While recognising that ‘refugees’ 
integration into the local economy is a long-term process”33, it is essential that settlement planning urgently take into 
account measures to address these physical limitations, including by allocating strategic locations for new 
marketplaces and creating or upgrading access routes to existing markets. 
In some refugee settlements in the West Nile, there is a need to focus on the continued relocation of refugees from 
flood-prone areas to higher ground, in coordination with OPM and negotiation with local land owners. This reality is 
reflected in the joint inter-agency MSNA results where Koboko and Lamwo districts recorded the highest percentage 
of refugee households reporting flooding, 54 percent and 42 percent respectively. 
The extensive road infrastructure within all refugee settlements will require ongoing maintenance and upgrades to 
increase their all-year durability through wet seasons. Investments in road networks improvements have the potential 
to create jobs for both refugees and host communities through a cash-for-work scheme. 
Gaps in solar street light coverage and institutional rainwater harvesting will need to be addressed so as to increase 
settlement security and provide more water for production. 
Since mid-2016, no countrywide in-depth shelter or NFI needs assessments have been conducted in the refugee 
settlements. Furthermore, there is no detailed database on shelter conditions per population or per settlement, nor is 
it known the total numbers that require urgent repairs or semi-permanent upgrades. 
Nonetheless, the 2018 joint inter-agency MSNA is able to provide an approximate indication of broad sector 
concerns that necessitate further investigation and analysis. A total of 73 percent of all refugee households surveyed 
claimed that their shelter is prone to leaking when it rains. In addition, South Sudanese refugees in the West Nile 
reported to possess fewer NFIs per household in comparison to the Congolese and Burundians in the Southwest. A 
door-to-door household NFI survey in all settlements would be key to provide a deeper understanding of unmet NFI 
needs across the operation – to be followed by a targeted distribution of missing items. It is a priority for the sector 
to gather baseline information and data in order to ascertain individual needs and to prioritize targeted shelter/NFI 
interventions. 
32 UNHCR/REACH Joint Multi-Sector Needs Assessment, 2018. 
33 FAO, Food security, resilience and well-being analysis of refugees and host communities in Northern Uganda,” Resilience Analysis 
Report No. 12, 2018. 
Needs Analys is - UGANDA COUNTRY RRP

U G A N DA R R P > JA N UA R Y 2 0 1 9 - D E C EMB E R 2 0 2 0 29 
Despite a lack of comprehensive data, it is evident that all refugee population groups continue to live in emergency 
shelters longer than advisable and many PSN families are yet to receive labour support to upgrade to semipermanent 
construction. In Bidibidi settlement alone, partners had not reached even 10 percent of vulnerable South 
Sudanese refugees with shelter needs as of August 201834. 
The sector will seek to uphold a fair and consistent approach to the design and implementation of semi-permanent 
shelters, incorporating the most environmentally-friendly and contextually-appropriate materials to the extent 
possible. More efforts are needed for shelter partners to adhere to inter-agency minimum standards such as termite 
protection for timber or bamboo and the overall shelter dimensions, and to strengthen coordination with the WASH, 
Energy and Environment, and Livelihoods and Resilience sectors in order to achieve a holistic approach to refugee 
protection and management. 
WASH 
On average, access to water in refugee hosting sub-counties stood at 16 litres per person per day (l/p/d) as of June 
2018, with 18.7 l/p/d and 17.5 l/p/d for South Sudan refugees and their hosts respectively. In settlements hosting 
refugees from the DRC and Burundi, water supply ranged from below 10 to 15 l/p/d for both refugees and host 
communities. 
Most water infrastructure developed in the settlements is temporary, with technical and financial feasibility limitations. 
Unit cost of supplying water is high due to operational inefficiencies coupled with reliance on costly water trucking to 
fill a 12 percent gap in the daily water demand in the settlements. 
Provision of water has largely focused on water demand for domestic use, although refugees continued to resort to 
domestic water supply for brick production and to mud plaster their homes. In 2017, the construction of valley tanks 
in Kyaka II and Rwamwanja settlements was an attempt to provide water supply for productive uses, but huge 
inadequacies have compromised the success of these initiatives. 
There is complete lack of integrated water resource management, with developments in the settlements often failing 
to consider the larger catchment area for planning and programming. The environment is heavily impacted by 
over-reliance on groundwater without monitoring behaviour of benevolent aquifers in most refugee-hosting districts, 
absence of deliberate catchment conservation and rehabilitation initiatives. 
According to the 2018 joint inter-agency MSNA, 79 percent of refugee and host community households own a single 
family latrine, with over 55 percent of refugee households reporting child males and females as unable to access the 
latrine due to their young age. 
In settlements hosting South Sudanese refugees, unavailability of materials for construction of family latrines coupled 
with low levels of community participation have delayed transition from communal to family latrines. In settlements 
hosting refugees from the DRC and Burundi, instances of hard ground conditions and waterlogged areas are 
34 As of August 2018, UNHCR Protection team estimate approx. 15,000 PSNs in Bidibidi, out of a total population of 287,800 people. 
Needs Analys is - UGANDA COUNTRY RRP

30 UGANDA R R P > JANUARY 2 0 1 9 - D E C E M B E R 2 0 2 0 
aggravating factors in low-level family latrine coverage among vulnerable families. In general, the life span of 
ordinary family latrines is shorter than optimal due to the inadequate provision of construction materials. While 3,017 
communal latrines exist in public spaces, 35 percent of schools, markets, food distribution centres and health 
facilities still lack institutional latrines. 
Across the entire refugee response there are only three faecal sludge treatment units and no vacuum truck to 
adequately manage excreta disposal. Solid waste at household level is rudimentarily treated as soil conditioner while 
markets and communal areas lack an organized management system to segregate, collect, dispose and/or reuse 
waste. Efforts to convert sanitation wastes into value are very limited and include biogas pilots and briquette making. 
The lack of a harmonized and context-specific behaviour change communication strategy for hygiene awareness 
initiatives continued to slow down adoption of positive hygiene practise among refugees. This is further worsened by 
limited provision of hygiene supplies, with 48 percent of refugee households reporting lack of soap during the joint 
inter-agency MSNA. Of them, 58 percent cited financial constraints as a reason for lacking soap, with the highest 
percentage in Mid West (79 percent) and South West (69 percent). 
Awareness on handwashing appears to be relatively high among refugee households as per the 2018 joint interagency 
MSNA, with 77 percent reporting washing their hands after defecating, 76 percent before eating and 56 
percent when hands are dirty. However, more efforts are needed to improve hygiene related to food preparation and 
child feeding. According to the joint inter-agency MSNA, only 37 percent of refugee households reported washing 
hands before cooking and 16 percent before child feeding and after cleaning a baby. 
There is a need to harmonize approaches in the implementation of WASH programmes in the settlements and 
refugee-hosting districts. Service delivery modalities in the settlements are structured around humanitarian principles 
and do not take into account tariff policy or transition plans for operation and maintenance. It is essential that WASH 
initiatives are in line and coordinated with District Development Plans (DDPs) and Catchment Managements Plans 
(CMPs). There is also a need for a shared knowledge management platform to help partners deliver services in line 
with government frameworks and priorities. Enforcement of statutory policies and regulations from Ministry of Water 
and Environment remains weak. 
Response Strategy & Priorities 
The Uganda 2019-2020 RRP serves as the joint strategy setting, needs assessment and resource mobilisation tool 
for all UN and NGO partners of the refugee response. 
The Uganda RRP is consistent with the following national and international frameworks: 
•• The Constitution of Uganda; 
•• The Uganda Refugee Act and Regulations; 
Response Strategy & Priorities - UGANDA COUNTRY RRP

U G A N DA R R P > JA N UA R Y 2 0 1 9 - D E C EMB E R 2 0 2 0 31 
•• The 1951 Refugee Convention, and the 1969 OAU Refugee Convention; 
•• IGAD regional declarations on refugee matters. 
Strategic objectives 
Under the leadership and coordination of the Government, the Uganda 2019-2020 RRP aims at achieving the 
following objectives, in line with the Uganda Multi-Year Multi-Partner Protection and Solutions Strategy (2016 -2020): 
Strategic objective 1: Through to 2020, Uganda’s asylum space is maintained, equal and unhindered access to 
territory is preserved and the government’s emergency preparedness and response capacity is progressively 
strengthened. 
Strategic objective 2: The Government of Uganda owns protection processes that promote the full enjoyment of 
rights, and international protection standards throughout the displacement cycle are efficient and fair. 
Strategic objective 3: By 2020, the refugee response paradigm in Uganda has progressively shifted from care and 
maintenance to inclusion and self-reliance through development of individual capacities and the promotion of a 
conducive environment for livelihoods opportunities. 
Strategic objective 4: By 2020, refugees progressively benefit from provision of inclusive basic social services, 
including health, education, child protection, water and sanitation, provided by national authorities in refugee hosting 
districts. 
Strategic objective 5: By 2020, refugees are well on their path to access durable solutions. They are either able to 
return voluntarily to their countries of origin, or have found third country solutions, or start attaining socio-economic 
opportunities similar to hosting communities in Uganda, including ability to exercise their full range of rights. 
Priority outcomes 
Partners and sectors will be guided by the following priority outcomes for planning and programming – which will 
also serve as criteria for prioritization in case of austerity and severe under-funding. 
•• Refugee protection: All newly arriving refugees and asylum seekers in Uganda will have access to territory 
and protection, including strengthened refugee status determination processes, biometric registration and 
documentation. The Uganda model, including the non-encampment policy, freedom of movement and 
right to work for refugees, will continue to provide a dignified refugee protection environment. Across all 
sectors, refugees must be assisted with respect to age, gender and diversity considerations, catering for 
Response Strategy & Priorities - UGANDA COUNTRY RRP

32 UGANDA R R P > JANUARY 2 0 1 9 - D E C E M B E R 2 0 2 0 
specific needs. Protection from sexual exploitation and abuse (PSEA) must be ensured, and there is zero 
tolerance in the refugee response towards this. An inter-agency Feedback, Referral, and Resolution 
Mechanism will be accessible to all refugees and host communities. Prevention and response to SGBV 
and child protection constitute major cross-cutting protection outcomes. 
•• Emergency response: All newly arriving refugees and asylum seekers in Uganda will benefit from lifesaving 
basic needs assistance interventions. This includes prioritization of operations supporting their 
initial installation in refugee settlements and/or in urban areas. Preparedness for higher than anticipated 
refugee influxes, and preparedness for related health emergency risks such as cholera or Ebola for 
example, remain priorities. 
•• Education: In a situation where primary and secondary facilities and resources lag far behind the overall 
need, and many education indicators are still in red, education must be prioritised. Education lays the 
foundation for the future prosperity and development of refugee (in asylum or upon their voluntary return 
home when possible) and Ugandan hosting communities. Education interventions support a set of related 
outcomes, such as child protection, prevention of SGBV, social cohesion and livelihoods, and therefore 
have a strong multiplier effect. 
•• Environment: Hosting communities, field monitoring, and expert studies have identified environmental 
protection and restoration as a priority, and environmental degradation at significant scale as a threat. The 
rapid growth of the refugee population in Uganda has led to a surge in demand for natural resources, 
including wood fuel, construction material, land for agriculture and groundwater along with an increase in 
waste production (e.g. faecal sludge, solid waste). The most visible and immediate impact is loss of forest 
cover and vegetation in refugee-hosting areas. Across all sectors, these effects need to be prevented and 
mitigated, for example through the use of alternative energy solutions for cooking fuel, and increased re/ 
afforestation measures, among others. This issue could negatively affect social cohesion and peaceful 
co-existence between refugees and hosting communities. 
•• Livelihoods: With the understanding that the RRP focusses on the immediate and transition phase of 
assisting refugees, desired priority outcomes are the improvement of livelihoods and access to short-term 
opportunities for refugees and hosting populations, especially in areas such as agricultural production, 
afforestation measures, and labour intensive public works.The aim is not necessarily to achieve 
sustainability, which is not a realistic outcome for an RRP, but an injection of short-term immediate 
livelihood opportunities. The outcome, benefiting both refugees and host community members, will have a 
multiplier effect on other desired outcomes, such as food security, social cohesion, reduction of aid 
dependency, and productive engagement of the youth. 
•• Urban refugees: As the Uganda refugee model allows for freedom of movement of refugees, some have 
chosen to reside in urban areas rather than settlements, while others commute between settlements and 
urban areas. While the situation of refugees in Kampala is well understood, this is not the case for 
Response Strategy & Priorities - UGANDA COUNTRY RRP

U G A N DA R R P > JA N UA R Y 2 0 1 9 - D E C EMB E R 2 0 2 0 33 
refugees in other towns and cities of Uganda. The 2019-2020 RRP will prioritize better assessments of 
refugees in urban areas, more engagement with municipal actors, and enhanced support to refugees and 
hosting communities in these areas, resources permitting. 
PRIORITY MODALITIES 
Across all sectors, to achieve the above strategic objectives and priority outcomes, the following modalities will take 
priority: 
1. Labour-intensive activities: As feasible and appropriate, opportunities for labour intensive works for larger 
numbers of unskilled, and skilled, refugees and host community members should be prioritized, over short and 
longer term. Among others, this may include public works, environmental restoration, community outreach, and 
stimulation of agricultural production, including value chain creation. 
2. Cash-based interventions and connectivity: Market feasibility permitting, opportunities to transform in-kind 
assistance to cash-based assistance should be seized. The injection of cash, through unconditional multi-purpose, 
and conditional cash-based interventions will have multiplier effects on food security, social cohesion, reduction of 
aid dependency, and productive engagement of the youth, among others. The development of the Minimum 
Expenditure Basket (MEB) tool will ultimately support the cost efficiency and cost effectiveness, and pave the way for 
coherent multi-purpose cash programming and delivery. The establishment of a common platform for cash transfers 
will be pursued. 
©UNHCR / Roger Burks 
Response Strategy & Priorities - UGANDA COUNTRY RRP

34 UGANDA R R P > JANUARY 2 0 1 9 - D E C E M B E R 2 0 2 0 
Partners will develop deeper partnerships with the private sector, such as financial service providers, mobile network 
operators, and other connectivity actors. This will result in an improvement of the necessary infrastructure for data 
delivery from cell towers to devices. In addition to helping increase refugees’ access to financial services, 
connectivity and related interventions will serve the entire response, for example for biometric registration and 
verification systems, communication with communities, access to information and adoption of innovative digital tools 
and solutions that have positive impact on protection outcomes. 
Activities will leverage the skills and capacities of communities to engage in and support a connected environment. 
Enhanced connectivity will also cover Ugandan hosting populations, supporting an inclusive approach. 
3. Capacity building for Government service providers and local actors: To achieve integrated social service 
delivery, the capacity of district authorities and line Ministries is a pre-requisite. The humanitarian response should 
gradually move away from parallel service provision and seize every opportunity to involve districts and line 
Ministries. The capacity of national NGOs will be further strengthened. As far as possible, national NGOs should be 
given greater responsibilities. 
4. Conflict-sensitive programming: Interventions across all sectors must be sensitive to drivers of conflict and 
tensions, as to ensure that they not only achieve their desired outcomes, but also contribute to social cohesion 
among refugee communities, and between refugees and host communities. Interventions must de-escalate, and not 
trigger additional tensions. Meaningful consultations with communities on programme/project design are essential. 
Across the response, the need for joint and coordinated assessments and in-depht thematic studies remains crucial 
to ensure a better understanding of the needs of refugee and host communities, to identify gaps in the response and 
draw attention to issues requiring strategy adjustments and innovation. 
MONITORING AND OVERSIGHT 
Building on ongoing initiatives, an enhanced monitoring framework will be established to assess the performance of 
this RRP and to ensure progress against the targets set by partners at the start of the planning process. 
Sector Co-leads, UNHCR and OPM will regularly reach out to RRP partners to gather information and data for RRP 
progress reports, including through sector activity mapping matrices (5Ws). Systematic progress reporting against 
the indicators in the RRP results framework will be a requirement for all partners. 
RRP partners also have an obligation to participate to existing coordination mechanisms at national, district and local 
level to help improve service delivery and address operational challenges. Partners are also required to regularly 
report on funding received against this plan as to demonstrate their contribution to the Uganda refugee model, and 
to support advocacy and resource mobilization. 
The ultimate goal of deploying a robust monitoring framework is ensuring transparency and accountability, avoiding 
duplications and re-adjusting the response when inefficacies and gaps are identified. 
Response Strategy & Priorities - UGANDA COUNTRY RRP

U G A N DA R R P > JA N UA R Y 2 0 1 9 - D E C EMB E R 2 0 2 0 35 
Strenghtening livelihoods and resilience 
Whilst being mainly a humanitarian plan, this RRP also 
includes a transition element towards sustainable 
refugee response programming in Uganda. As such, this 
plan contributes to achieving the Comprehensive 
Refugee Response Framework (CRRF) in Uganda, 
alongside interventions carried out by Government 
institutions within the framework of the National 
Development Plan (NDP II) and of Government-led 
sector transition plans for refugee-hosting areas, 
supported by multilateral and bilateral development 
partners. 
The scope of the 2019-20 Uganda RRP includes refugee 
protection and assistance for new refugee arrivals and 
long-term refugees, as well as resilience programming 
for refugees and hosting communities. Resilience 
interventions take place at three levels: 
1) individual or household level; 
2) community level; and 
3) system level. 
The focus of resilience interventions in this RRP is on 
supporting national systems to achieve integrated social 
service delivery for both refugees and hosting 
communities. 
Government sector response plans for refugee hosting 
areas will provide the planning and programming 
framework to respond to the needs of refugee and host 
communities in those sectors, including Education, 
Health & Nutrition, and WASH. At the time of developing 
this RRP, the Education Response Plan was the first 
government sector plan of this kind already launched 
and the Jobs and Livelihoods Response Plan was 
underway. 
Partnership & Coordination 
OPM provides the over-arching policy and coordination framework of the refugee response in Uganda, with CRRF 
serving as a whole-of-society approach to pursue and achieve an all-inclusive response. Operational coordination 
takes place within the framework of a refugee coordination structure dedicated specifically to refugee-hosting areas: 
1. Leadership level: co-led by the Uganda Government (OPM), and UNHCR; 
2. Inter-agency, country level (UN and development partner operational focal points, NGO country directors): 
co-led by the Uganda Government (OPM and MoLG) and UNHCR; 
3. Technical sector level: co-led by Government, UN and NGO partners for each sector; 
4. District/settlement level (inter-agency and sector structures): OPM, DLGs, and UNHCR co-chair. 
Under the overall leadership of OPM, the role of line Ministries and district authorities in the coordination of the 
refugee response will be further strengthened in 2019-2020. Sector working groups of the refugee response will 
Partners hip & Coordinat ion - UGANDA COUNTRY RRP

©UNHCR / Charlotte Allan

U G A N DA R R P > JA N UA R Y 2 0 1 9 - D E C EMB E R 2 0 2 0 37 
align with Government sector groups under the National Development Plan (NDP). The refugee Education, Health 
and WASH sector working groups have already piloted this approach and are co-chaired by line Ministries. This will 
ensure that refugees and refugee-hosting areas are increasingly integrated in the NDP. 
The refugee response in Uganda is delivered by a total of 107 partners, including 21 national NGOs (NNGO), 73 
international NGOs (INGO), 11 UN agencies, and 2 bilateral development partners (only those participating in the 
refugee response operational coordination and the RRP are listed here, but there also other development partners 
supporting refugee-hosting areas). 
THE SOUTH SUDAN REFUGEE RESPONSE IS DELIVERED BY 97 PARTNERS: 
National NGO: 16 
Care and Assistance for Forced Migrants (CAFOMI), Caritas Uganda (CU), Community Empowerment for Rural 
Development (CEFORD), Community Technology Empowerment Network (CTEN), Drop in the Basket (DiB), Humane 
Africa Mission (HAM), Humanitarian Assistance and Development Services (HADS), Infectious Disease Institute (IDI), 
Kabarole Research and Resource Centre (KRC), Reproductive Health Uganda (RHU), Rural Initiative for Community 
Empowerment in West Nile (RICE-WN), The Uganda National Apiculture Development Organization (Tunado), 
Transcultural Psychosocial Organization (TPO), Uganda Law Society (ULS), Uganda Red Cross Society (URCS), 
Uganda Refugee Disaster and Management Council (URDMC). 
International NGO: 69 
A-Z Children’s Charity, Action Africa Help (AAH), Action Against Hunger (ACF), Adventist Development and Relief 
Agency (ADRA), African Initiatives for Relief and Development (AIRD), African Medical and Research Foundation 
(AMREF), African Women and Youth Action for Development (AWYAD), Agency for Accelerated Regional 
Development (AFARD), Agency for Cooperation and Research in Development (ACORD), Agency for Technical 
Cooperation and Development (ACTED), American Refugee Committee (ARC), Andre Foods International (AFI), 
Association for Aid and Relief Japan (AARJ), Association of Volunteers in International Service (AVSI), Associazione 
Centro Aiuti Voluntari (ACAV), Building Resources Across Communities (BRAC), CARE, Catholic Organisation for 
Relief and Development Aid (CORDAID), Catholic Relief Service (CRS), Child Voices International, Concern World 
Wide (CWW), Cooperazione e Sviluppo (CESVI), DanChurchAid (DCA), Danish Refugee Council (DRC), Doctors with 
Africa (CUAMM), Finn Church Aid (FCA), Food for the Hungry (FH), Give Directly, Global Aim, Global Refugee 
International (GRI), Healing Kadi Foundation, Help Age International, Humanitarian Initiative Just Relief Aid (HIJRA), 
Humanity&Inclusion (HI), IMPACT, Inter-church Organization for Development Cooperation (ICCO Cooperation), 
International Aid Services (IAS), International Center for Research in Agro Forestry (ICRAF), International Committee 
of the Red Cross (ICRC), International Rescue Committee (IRC), IsraAid, Jesuit Refugee Service (JRS), Johanniter, 
Lutheran World Federation (LWF), Lutheran World Relief (LWR), Malteser International (MI), Medical Teams 
International (MTI), Mercy Corps (MC), Norwegian Refugee Council (NRC), OXFAM, Peace Winds Japan (PWJ), Peter 
C. Alderman Foundation (PCAF), Plan International (PI), Real Medicine Foundation (RMF), Right to Play (RtP), Salvation 
Army, Samaritan’s Purse (SP), Save the Children International (SCI), Self Help Africa (SHA), Trocaire, Tutapona Trauma 
Partners hip & Coordinat ion - UGANDA COUNTRY RRP

38 UGANDA R R P > JANUARY 2 0 1 9 - D E C E M B E R 2 0 2 0 
Rehabilitation (TTR), War Child Canada (WCC), War Child Holland (WCH), Water Mission Uganda (WMU), 
Welthungerhilfe (WHH), Windle International Uganda (WIU), World Vision International (WVI), Young Women’s 
Christian Association (YWCA), ZOA. 
UN: 10 
United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), United Nations Entity for 
Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UNWOMEN), United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization 
(FAO), United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), United Nations Migration Agency (IOM), United 
Nations Officer for Project Services (UNOPS), United Nations Populations Fund (UNFPA), United Nations World Food 
Programme (WFP), United Nations World Health Organization (WHO). 
Bilateral development partners: 2 
Belgian Development Agency (ENABEL), German International Cooperation (GiZ) 
THE DRC (AND OTHER NATIONALITIES) REFUGEE RESPONSE IS DELIVERED BY 61 PARTNERS: 
National NGO: 11 
Baylor, Care and Assistance for Forced Migrants (CAFOMI), Friends of Kisoro, Humane Africa Mission (HAM), 
Humanitarian Assistance and Development Services (HADS), InterAid, Kabarole Research and Resource Centre 
(KRC), Nsamizi Training Institute of Social Development (NSAMIZI), Programme for Accessible health, Communication 
and Education (PACE), Uganda Law Society (ULS), Uganda Red Cross Society (URCS). 
International NGO: 41 
Action Africa Help (AAH), Action Against Hunger (ACF), Adventist Development and Relief Agency (ADRA), Africa 
Humanitarian Action (AHA), African Initiatives for Relief and Development (AIRD), African Women and Youth Action for 
Development (AWYAD), Agency for Cooperation and Research in Development (ACORD), Agency for Technical 
Cooperation and Development (ACTED), American Refugee Committee (ARC), Association for Aid and Relief Japan 
(AARJ), Association of Volunteers in International Service (AVSI), Building Resources Across Communities (BRAC), 
CARE, Catholic Organisation for Relief and Development Aid (CORDAID), Catholic Relief Service (CRS), Concern 
World Wide (CWW), Danish Refugee Council (DRC), Finn Church Aid (FCA), Finnish Refugee Council (FRC), Food for 
the Hungry (FH), Give Directly, Help Age International, Humanitarian Initiative Just Relief Aid (HIJRA), Humanitarian 
OpenStreetMap Team (HOT), IMPACT, International Aid Services (IAS), International Committee of the Red Cross 
(ICRC), International Rescue Committee (IRC), Johanniter, Lutheran Word Federation (LWF), Lutheran World Relief 
(LWR), Medical Teams International (MTI), Norwegian Refugee Council (NRC), OXFAM, Regional Health Integration to 
Enhance Services in Eastern Uganda (RHITES), Samaritan’s Purse (SP), Save the Children International (SCI), 
Tutapona Trauma Rehabilitation (TTR), War Child Holland (WCH), Windle International Uganda (WIU), World Vision 
International (WVI). 
Partners hip & Coordinat ion - UGANDA COUNTRY RRP

U G A N DA R R P > JA N UA R Y 2 0 1 9 - D E C EMB E R 2 0 2 0 39 
UN: 9 
United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), United Nations 
Environment Programme (UNEP), United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), United Nations High 
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), United Nations Migration Agency (IOM), United Nations Populations Fund 
(UNFPA), United Nations World Food Programme (WFP), United Nations World Health Organization (WHO). 
THE BURUNDI REFUGEE RESPONSE IS DELIVERED BY 29 PARTNERS: 
National NGO: 5 
Care and Assistance for Forced Migrants (CAFOMI), Friends of Kisoro, Nsamizi Training Institute of Social 
Development (NSAMIZI), Programme for Accessible health, Communication and Education (PACE), Uganda Red 
Cross Society (URCS). 
International NGO: 18 
Africa Humanitarian Action (AHA), African Initiatives for Relief and Development (AIRD), American Refugee 
Committee (ARC), Danish Refugee Council (DRC), Finnish Refugee Council (FRC), Food for the Hungry (FH), 
Humanitarian Initiative Just Relief Aid (HIJRA), IMPACT, International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), International 
Rescue Committee (IRC), Medical Teams International (MTI), Norwegian Refugee Council (NRC), OXFAM, Regional 
Health Integration to Enhance Services in Eastern Uganda (RHITES), Samaritan’s Purse (SP), Save the Children 
International (SCI), Tutapona Trauma Rehabilitation (TTR), Windle International Uganda (WIU). 
UN: 6 
United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), United Nations 
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), United Nations Migration Agency (IOM), United Nations Populations Fund 
(UNFPA), United Nations World Food Programme (WFP). 
Partners hip & Coordinat ion - UGANDA COUNTRY RRP

©UNHCR / Michele Sibiloni

42 UGANDA R R P > JANUARY 2 0 1 9 - D E C E M B E R 2 0 2 0 
Planned Response for 2019 & 
2020 
Sector strategies are guided by the overall strategy and operational priorities, laying out the approach and measures 
that the sectors envisage to address identified needs, with a focus on priority needs. In sectors with existing 
government response plans (Education, Health, and Water), the response and priorities are aligned to those plans. 
Protection 
The overall Protection objective is to ensure that refugees and asylum-seekers have access to territorial asylum and 
fair and swift asylum procedures, and fully enjoy their rights as set forth in international and domestic refugees laws, 
including documentation, freedom of movement, right to work and access to services. Efforts will be put towards 
supporting and strengthening Government’s institutional capacity for emergency response and improving 
registration and efficiency in the asylum system whilst continuing provision of life-saving services, monitoring and 
mitigation of protection risks. 
Partners will endeavour to ensure that the protection and solutions strategy is people-centred and follows an age, 
gender and diversity approach, engaging women, men, girls and boys in designing and delivering programmes. 
Comprehensive feedback and referral mechanisms will be strengthened to ensure accountability to affected 
populations – a fundamental principle underpinning the entire refugee response. The response will ensure that 
persons with specific needs have equal access to protection and assistance and have the opportunity to participate 
in community self-management and decision-making. 
Reinforcing psychosocial services and infrastructure in refugee-hosting areas remains a key priority, including 
identification of individuals carrying trauma, provision of individual and group counselling and follow-up. 
Partners will increase efforts and interventions aiming at fostering peaceful coexistence among communities 
(between refugees and hosts and between refugees of different ethnic background), including community dialogue, 
advocacy and awareness campaigns highlighting the positive impact of refugee presence on the local economy. 
Child Protection 
Child Protection partners will continue to strengthen the case management system through emphasis on case 
prioritization and workforce skills development. The child protection module of proGres v4 will be rolled-out to 
enhance case management, improve collaboration and data collection. This will include adoption of inter-agency 
Standard Operating Procedures and Information Sharing Protocols. 
Planned Response for 2019 & 2020 - UGANDA COUNTRY RRP

U G A N DA R R P > JA N UA R Y 2 0 1 9 - D E C EMB E R 2 0 2 0 43 
Focus will remain on improving the placement of unaccompanied children in alternative care, including training of 
foster parents and provision of livelihood support. Efforts will be made to further align alternative care procedures for 
refugees with national alternative care policies. Given the limited capacity of the child protection workforce, 
community-based child protection structures will be strengthened through training, ongoing mentoring and provided 
with support to effectively follow-up and monitor children placed in alternative care and other children with 
protection concerns to ensure early identification and mitigation of further protection risks. 
Psychosocial support for children in refugee and host communities will be provided, including in Child Friendly 
Spaces. Structured psychosocial interventions will focus on strengthening children’s resilience and their capacities to 
protect themselves. Provision of support for post-primary education, vocational skills training and other targeted 
interventions for refugee and host community adolescents and youths will be strengthened to reduce their 
susceptibility to various protection risks, including teenage pregnancy, early marriage and drugs dealing. The 
capacity of the social welfare workforce at sub-national level will be strengthened through recruitment, advocacy for 
deployment of staff, and training of these on child protection. 
SGBV 
Awareness activities will be strengthened to increase understanding of SGBV, Sexual Exploitation and Abuse (SEA), 
human trafficking and existing mechanisms to report such these incidents. Simplified referral pathways will be 
developed and widely distributed to increase understanding of reporting mechanisms, while basic assistance for 
vulnerable individuals will continue with a view to reduce reliance on negative coping mechanisms and exposure to 
SGBV risk. 
Youth will be specifically targeted with information and recreational activities. Promoting engagement of men and 
boys in the development and implementation of any SGBV strategy remains key in pursuing transformational 
behaviour change, including through increased use of the Start, Awareness, Support, Action (SASA) methodology to 
address the power imbalance between men and women. 
Investment in infrastructure and assets is essential in preventing and responding to SGBV, including installation of 
security lights in common areas, establishment of safe spaces and wellness centres for women, psychosocial, 
medical and legal supports for SGBV survivors, and procurement of additional vehicles and motorcycles to enhance 
police mobility on patrol and outreach. Capacity building of service providers will be key to ensure provision of 
quality and effective services to SGBV survivors. 
A national plan of action will be implemented in 2019-2020 to ensure SGBV prevention and response is 
mainstreamed across all sectors. Linkages with the Livelihood & Resilience sector are of particular importance, both 
in terms of prevention (economic empowerment of men and women) and response (livelihood support for SGBVs 
survivors). 
OBJECTIVES 
1. Registration conducted on an individual basis with minimum set of data required 
Planned Response for 2019 & 2020 - UGANDA COUNTRY RRP

44 UGANDA R R P > JANUARY 2 0 1 9 - D E C E M B E R 2 0 2 0 
2. Adequate and quality child protection services for children, including case management services, are 
provided in refugee and host communities 
3. Effective and safe child protection systems that prevent and respond to child protection concerns in 
refugee and host communities are strengthened 
4. Protection of and accountability to all refugees are strengthened through meaningful engagement with 
communities, with particular attention to at-risk groups 
5. Peaceful co-existence among communities strengthened 
6. Protection systems are strengthened and refugees women and girls are aware of the existing referral 
pathways with the aim of ensuring their full enjoyment of rights, reduction of SGBV risks and reinforced 
multi-sectoral response including through mainstreaming of SGBV across all sectors 
7. Physical safety, access to justice, rule of law and civilian character of the refugee settlements is assured and 
protection of human rights promoted in refugee settings 
Education 
The main objectives of the 2019-2020 Education Sector 
strategy, in alignment with the Education Response Plan 
for Refugees and Host Communities in Uganda (ERP), is 
to provide refugee and host community girls and boys 
with equitable and inclusive access to a quality 
education and to strengthen systems at the national, 
district and community levels. This strategy has been 
designed to enable those who are out of school to 
return to schools and those who are in school and at risk 
of dropping out to continue their learning. 
To bring more learners into education and ensure quality 
of learning, the absorption capacity of the primary and 
secondary schools will be strengthened through setting 
increasing targets in the pupil:teacher ratio over the next 
two years, as well as promoting double shifting to 
address the significant overcrowding and overenrolment 
in primary education. To address the 
challenges of teacher supply and quality, ongoing 
support will be provided to primary and secondary 
teachers and head teachers, as well as refugee teachers 
serving as classroom assistants. An improved 
pupil:teacher ratio is critical to achieving better learning 
outcomes. The provision of alternative learning 
pathways such as accelerated education programmes 
will help ensure access to education for overage 
children, out-of school-children and youth and help them 
transition back to the formal system. 
The sector will continue to invest in quality of teaching 
and learning through continuous professional 
development for teachers in areas such as child-centred 
pedagogy, psychosocial support, classroom 
management and lifeskills. Specifically, targeting training 
and support for refugee teachers will provide 
opportunities for skilled professionals to continue their 
profession following displacement. Essential materials 
for students will complement these efforts to ensure that 
children not only access school but that teaching and 
learning are supported. 
The response will focus on strengthening engagement 
between district local government and Education Sector 
partners, including through regular education coordination 
meetings and stronger information 
management and sharing at settlement, district and 
national levels. At the community level, the capacity of 
school-based governance structures, such as School 
Management Committees, will be enhanced to help 
monitor quality teaching and learning at the school-level. 
Planned Response for 2019 & 2020 - UGANDA COUNTRY RRP

U G A N DA R R P > JA N UA R Y 2 0 1 9 - D E C EMB E R 2 0 2 0 45 
© UNHCR / OLI COHEN 
Supporting vulnerable children to access education will 
continue, particularly for adolescents and secondary 
school aged children as well as children with specific 
needs. It is also a priority that an increased number of 
girls enroll in primary schools, sit and pass P7 exams and 
subsequently enroll and complete secondary school. 
The provision of life skills and vocational skills training to 
children and adolescents, especially those who are out 
of school, is critical to ensure social stability among the 
refugee and host communities. 
Through the Education sector, partners will work toward 
enhancing working relationships with District Education 
Officers and School Management Committees/Board of 
Governors and Parent Teacher Associations to ensure 
community ownership of schools. 
OBJECTIVES 
1. Equitable access and inclusive relevant learning opportunties increased 
2. Delivery of quality education and training improved 
3. Systems for effective delivery strengthened 
Planned Response for 2019 & 2020 - UGANDA COUNTRY RRP

46 UGANDA R R P > JANUARY 2 0 1 9 - D E C E M B E R 2 0 2 0 
Energy & Environment 
A catchment-based approach will be used to plan and implement environment and natural resource protection and 
restoration while promoting green livelihoods. In partnership with District Local Governments (DLGs) and Water 
Management Zones, environmental impact assessments, action plans and forest resource management plans will be 
developed for each refugee-hosting sub or micro-catchment. Site plans will designate protected buffers, wetlands 
and plantation zones around institutions and roadways. Boundary planting will be used to control movement of 
livestock. A minimum of 20 trees will be planted and maintained per refugee per year including indigenous, fruit 
trees and useful species to meet the needs of refugees and hosts using a cash-for-work approach. Plantations for 
energy will be established for each settlement. 
Access to energy will be improved for cooking, lighting and productive uses. Demand for cooking fuel will be 
decreased by improving access to energy-saving in households and institutions, by training of trainers and artisans 
to fabricate energy products, including improved cookstoves and heat-retaining bags. Alternative sources of energy 
such as solar, briquettes and biogas will be promoted where appropriate. Energy kiosks will be supported to provide 
market access to quality energy products. 
Energy, environment and climate-resilient interventions will be mainstreamed into each sector, especially awareness, 
advocacy and education. Climate-smart agriculture, agroforestry and sustainable construction value chains will be 
enhanced. Solar lighting will be increased through street lighting and solar lanterns in NFI kits. Health facilities and 
schools will benefit from solarisation and institutional stoves. Rainwater harvesting, faecal and solid waste 
management will be prioritized in water resource management activities. 
OBJECTIVES 
1. Environment and natural resources protected and restored and green livelihoods promoted using a 
catchment-based approach 
2. Access to sufficient and sustainable basic energy services for lighting, power and cooking increased and 
climate change drivers mitigated with reduced reliance on wood and fossil fuels 
3. Energy, environment and climate response planning, coordination, implementation, monitoring 
strengthened and environmental mitigation measures mainstreamed across all sectors 
Food security 
This plan envisages continuation of general food assistance for refugees to allow them to meet their immediate food 
and nutrition needs and sustain a minimum level of food security. 
All new refugees arrivals at the border crossing points will received food assistance in the form of High Energy 
Biscuits (HEB), while hot meals will be served in transit and reception centres, as refugees await relocation to the 
Planned Response for 2019 & 2020 - UGANDA COUNTRY RRP

U G A N DA R R P > JA N UA R Y 2 0 1 9 - D E C EMB E R 2 0 2 0 47 
settlement. A settling-in ration will be provided when refugees move to their new plots, with subsequent monthly dry 
rations in the form of food or cash transfers. After completion of refugee verification in the settlements, data from 
UNHCR’s proGres and Biometric Identity Management System (BIMS) databases will be used to verify the identity of 
all persons authorized to collect food assistance on behalf of beneficiary households. 
Cash-based Interventions will increasingly replace in-kind food as a transfer modality in order to provide additional 
flexibility in the choice of locally available food commodities and to enhance local market prospects. The choice of 
transfer modality in selected settlements will be informed by regular market assessments, and market food price 
monitoring will determine the transfer value to be provided to beneficiaries. Different distribution models will be 
assessed to keep pace with the evolution of the financial services landscape in Uganda. Furthermore, an integrated 
programming approach will be pursued to strengthen the overall food system in refugee-hosting areas, including by 
improving retail supply chain management in local markets. The objective is to ensure that food commodities are 
fairly-priced and meet quality and quantity standards in the market. 
Gender and protection measures as well as accountability to affected populations will be mainstreamed to ensure 
the food assistance is effective and responsive to the food security needs of refugees. In addition, monitoring and 
impact assessments will be conducted to ensure that food assistance reaches the targeted refugee households and 
expected food security outcomes are achieved. 
OBJECTIVES 
1. Refugees have access to adequate nutritious food to meet their basic food and nutrition needs 
2. Targeted food assistance provided to the most vulnerable refugee households based on assessed needs 
3. Food Assistance to refugees progressively linked to livelihood and self-reliance interventions to enhance 
resilience 
© UNHCR / ROGER BURKS 
Planned Response for 2019 & 2020 - UGANDA COUNTRY RRP

48 UGANDA R R P > JANUARY 2 0 1 9 - D E C E M B E R 2 0 2 0 
Health & Nutrition 
Overall, the strategy of the Health & Nutrition sector is to ensure full integration of comprehensive primary health 
care services for refugees into national and local government systems. Health partners will continue to enhance 
coordination and inter-sectoral collaboration; strengthen the provision of equitable, safe, quality and sustainable 
health services in refugee-hosting districts, both for new refugee arrivals and long-term refugees; and reinforce 
health systems in refugee-hosting areas. 
Provision of the minimum health service package for all refugees is a key priority, with an emphasis on preventive 
and promotive health care for new refugee arrivals at entry points, transit and reception centers and during their 
initial stay in settlements. This package includes vaccination, nutrition screening, emergency referrals and provision 
of life-saving primary health care services, in addition to surveillance and response measures for disease outbreaks. 
Nutrition programs will continue throughout the period covered by this RRP. Malnourished refugees will be treated 
based on presence or absence of complications. Patients suffering from Severe Acute Malnutrition (SAM) without 
medical complication will be provided with outpatient care; those suffering from SAM with medical complication will 
receive inpatient care; and those suffering from Moderate Acute Malnutrition (MAM) will be enrolled in 
Supplementary Feeding Programmes (SFP). As a preventive measure, children aged 6-23 months and Pregnant 
Women and Lactating Mothers (PLW) will be targeted with Blanket Supplementary Feeding Programmes (BSFP). 
Partners will also support and promote Infant and Young Child Feeding (IYCF). Effective prevention and management 
of malnutrition will be also pursued through reduction of micronutrient deficiencies and community management of 
acute malnutrition. 
Capacity building of health workforce is a priority, especially strengthening the role of community-based health 
workers – a key and very often the only liaison between a patient and the health services. Their role proves to be 
particularly important in raising awareness on reproductive health and HIV/AIDS prevention and treatment. 
Emergency preparedness and response activities will be strengthened to improve the capacity of health care 
providers to effectively respond to potential disease outbreaks, including by enhancing disease surveillance and 
stockpiling essential drugs. 
Close coordination with the Ministry of Health will continue at national, district and local level to ensure that health 
care services for refugees and host communities in refugee-hosting areas are in line with government policies, 
guidelines and standards. 
OBJECTIVES 
1. Provide emergency life-saving health and nutrition interventions for new refugee arrivals and strengthen 
outbreak preparedness and response 
Planned Response for 2019 & 2020 - UGANDA COUNTRY RRP

U G A N DA R R P > JA N UA R Y 2 0 1 9 - D E C EMB E R 2 0 2 0 49 
2. Increase equitable access to and utilization of integrated quality health services for refugees and host 
communities across all the phases of displacement 
3. Strengthen the health care system to cope with the increased demand for health services by refugees and 
host population 
Livelihoods & Resilience 
A graduated approach will be used to stabilize and build 
diversified, sustainable and resilient livelihoods, with 
emergency livelihood interventions serving as a basis to 
develop longer-term strategies. In acknowledging that 
the time refugees have been displaced for is not closely 
related with their degree of vulnerability , emergency 
livelihood support will target new refugee arrivals and 
vulnerable long-term refugees. In line with individuals’ 
skills, knowledge and aspirations, emergency livelihood 
support will promote immediate job creation, supported 
by initial capacity building. Interventions will include 
community asset creation (e.g. road rehabilitation, 
irrigation system, reforestation, markets and other 
infrastructure development), access to productive assets 
to stimulate agriculture production and other income 
generating activities. 
Whilst contributing to reduce dependency on 
humanitarian assistance, emergency livelihood support 
alone is not enough to achieve sustainability. The 
transition to sustainable livelihoods requires the 
promotion of market-driven opportunities, private sector 
linkages and extensive capacity building of individuals 
and livelihood groups to profitably scale up their 
activities. Strategic investment in businesses will support 
value chains and sustainable job creation. Livelihood 
diversification is a key priority to ensure that the capacity 
of refugees to better cope with future shocks and 
stresses is enhanced. The sector will increase capacity 
building efforts to improve vocational, technical, 
business, entrepreneurial and financial skills of refugee 
and host communities. 
An enabling environment -understood as equitable 
access to policies and rights, technical and financial 
services and infrastructures- is crucial for sustainability 
and resilience. Engagement and capacity building of 
DLG to integrate refugees into district development 
plans and improve refugee access to rights will be a 
critical activity. 
OBJECTIVES 
1. Emergency livelihood support to complement basic household needs is provided 
2. Household livelihood strategies are strengthened to support household self-reliance 
3. The enabling environment is reinforced to support resilient livelihoods 
Planned Response for 2019 & 2020 - UGANDA COUNTRY RRP

50 UGANDA R R P > JANUARY 2 0 1 9 - D E C E M B E R 2 0 2 0 
Shelter, Settlement & NFIs 
The sector will continue to ensure that all populations of concern receive appropriate and timely shelter and NFI 
support in line with the minimum agreed standards for Uganda. The introduction of cash-based shelter/NFI 
assistance instead of in-kind kits will, where feasible, empower refugees with greater independence and dignity, as 
well as contribute to local economic growth. Direct labour support to the construction of PSN shelters, both 
emergency and semi-permanent, will remain a priority, along with ongoing repairs and maintenance works to 
communal shelters at transit facilities. 
The implementation of a revised shelter strategy, incorporating more environmentally-sustainable, culturally-sensitive 
and flexible design options, will be a core sector goal. In addition, the establishment of settlement planning 
guidelines will facilitate site planning improvements and contribute to maximise land use, increase host community 
benefits to refugee presence and expand livelihood opportunities for both refugees and hosts. Any roadworks 
project will require a comprehensive needs assessment to guarantee its added value to refugees and host 
communities. 
The phased rollout of a household address system for refugees will enable the integration of settlement cadastral 
plans with local government plans, and help keeping track of multi-sector assistance and defining locations for future 
interventions. The integration of settlement plans with Uganda’s Land Information System (LIS) will enable the 
government to take full responsibility for all land use development and management in refugee-hosting areas. 
Partners active in the sector will expand the scope and reach of construction trainings and cash-for-work initiatives 
for refugees and hosts when implementing any shelter or infrastructure programme. Furthermore, there will be a 
strong focus on ensuring that fair and equitable support is provided to all refugees across the country, provided that 
sector standards and strategies be respected in all settlements. 
OBJECTIVES 
1. Ensure the minimum NFI standards for all refugees are met 
2. Access to improved and sustainable shelters for refugee households is increased 
3. Integration of settlement plans with local government plans for maximized land use is improved 
4. Multi-sectoral support services for the refugee response provided 
Planned Response for 2019 & 2020 - UGANDA COUNTRY RRP

U G A N DA R R P > JA N UA R Y 2 0 1 9 - D E C EMB E R 2 0 2 0 51 
WASH 
The sector aims at ensuring that refugees and hosting populations have safe and sufficient access to quality water 
and to improved sanitation and hygiene services, including at household level and in institutions such as schools and 
health facilities. The overall goal is to ensure that refugees can fulfil their basic right to water, sanitation and hygiene, 
in line with Sustainable Development Goals 6. 
The sector will put more effort in shifting from a humanitarian to a market-driven and development approach vis a vis 
the implementation of WASH programmes, with people’s needs and the environment at the centre of any 
intervention. 
Ministry of Water and Environment, Catchment Management Committees and DLGs will take the lead role in the 
planning, design, implementation, operation and maintenance of WASH initiatives in respective areas. The 
government sector response plan, currently under development, will guide interventions in refugee-hosting districts. 
Improving cost-effectiveness of delivering water and sanitation services remains a key priority, including through 
optimization of existing infrastructure and adoption of appropriate digital technologies for installing and monitoring 
solar/hybrid systems at water sources. 
Furthermore, catchment protection and rehabilitation activities will be incorporated and strengthened as part of 
catchment management approach. WASH partners will enhance coordination with other sectors including on 
strengthening delivery of services in institutions. Community engagement in management of services will be 
strengthened to improve participation and ownership and opportunities to engage with private sector explored. A 
key priority is to increase the capacity of WASH partners to respond to emergencies, including through capacity 
building and advance planning. 
OBJECTIVES 
1. Access to water supply for refugees and hosting populations improved 
2. Access to sanitation and hygiene services for refugees and hosting population improved 
3. Institutions for effective management and provision of water and sanitation at national, regional and lower 
levels considering refugee settlements and host communities strengthened 
Planned Response for 2019 & 2020 - UGANDA COUNTRY RRP

52 UGANDA R R P > JANUARY 2 0 1 9 - D E C E M B E R 2 0 2 0 
Financial Requirements 
ORGANIZATION BURUNDI DRC & Other SOUTH 
SUDAN TOTAL 
Action Against Hunger (ACF) 5,800,000 7,000,000 12,800,000 
African Women and Youth Action for 
Development (AWYAD) 500,000 600,000 1,100,000 
Agency for Technical Cooperation 
and Development (ACTED) 1,500,000 1,500,000 3,000,000 
American Refugee Committee (ARC) 653,057 4,323,094 4,021,027 8,997,178 
Association for Aid and Relief, Japan 
(AAR Japan) 2,000,000 2,000,000 
Association of Volunteers in 
Internation Service (AVSI) 15,805,000 3,047,787 18,852,787 
Building Resources Across 
Communities (BRAC) 400,000 700,000 1,100,000 
Care and Assistance For Forced 
Migrants (CAFOMI) 954,366 1,036,804 2,821,273 4,812,443 
CARE International 6,050,000 9,797,603 15,847,603 
Caritas Uganda 2,909,603 2,909,603 
Catholic Organization for Relied and 
Development Aid (CORDAID) 2,563,000 3,731,000 6,294,000 
Catholic Relief Services 6,954,863 9,471,777 16,426,640 
Cooperazione e Sviluppo (CESVI) 650,000 650,000 
DanChurchAid (DCA) 5,570,000 5,570,000 
Danish Refugee Council (DRC) 29,500,000 33,199,975 62,699,975 
Enabel 4,147,534 4,147,534 
Finn Church Aid (FCA) 1,300,000 5,200,000 6,500,000 
Food for the Hungry (FH) 3,982,797 3,982,797 
Humane Africa Mission 900,000 2,350,000 3,250,000 
Humanitarian OpenStreetMap Team 
(HOT) 900,000 900,000 
Humanity & Inclusion (HI) 900,000 900,000 
IMPACT Initiatives 30,598 429,687 784,016 1,244,301 
2019-2020 Financial Requirements Summary 
By Refugee Population and Organization 
Financial Requirements - UGANDA COUNTRY RRP

U G A N DA R R P > JA N UA R Y 2 0 1 9 - D E C EMB E R 2 0 2 0 53 
ORGANIZATION BURUNDI DRC & Other SOUTH 
SUDAN TOTAL 
Inter-church Organization for 
Development Cooperation (ICCO) 461,189 461,189 
International Aid Services (IAS) 250,000 321,516 571,516 
International Rescue Committee (IRC) 3,225,514 3,225,514 
IsraAid 240,000 240,000 
Johanniter 515,000 567,000 1,082,000 
Kabarole Research and Resource 
Centre (KRC) 1,441,829 1,441,829 
Lutheran World Federation (LWF) 7,164,163 11,589,258 18,753,421 
Lutheran World Relief (LWR) 400,000 600,000 1,000,000 
Malteser International 2,245,713 2,245,713 
Medical Teams International (MTI) 2,123,778 2,578,370 4,702,148 
Mercy Corps 3,500,000 3,500,000 
Norwegian Refugee Council (NRC) 12,219,049 28,818,111 41,037,160 
OXFAM 5,631,683 26,768,750 32,400,433 
Plan International (PI) 3,393,273 3,393,273 
Right to Play (RtP) 1,700,000 1,700,000 
Samaritan's Purse (SP) 1,240,000 710,000 1,950,000 
Save the Children International (SCI) 7,676,421 14,730,068 22,406,489 
Self Help Africa 700,000 700,000 
TPO Uganda 2,878,945 2,878,945 
TROCAIRE (Only operational in 
Palabek Settlement) 1,350,000 1,350,000 
Tutapona Trauma Rehabilitation (TTR) 300,000 300,000 
Uganda Red Cross Society (URCS) 60,000 2,927,410 4,169,689 7,157,099 
United Nations Children's Fund 
(UNICEF) 6,667,847 29,276,954 55,950,193 91,894,994 
United Nations Development 
Programme (UNDP) 1,210,000 2,870,000 13,440,000 17,520,000 
United Nations Entity for Gender 
Equality and the Empowerment of 
Women (UN WOMEN) 
6,500,000 6,500,000 
United Nations Food and Agriculture 
Organization (FAO) 9,761,124 18,755,573 28,283,802 56,800,499 
United Nations High Commissioner 
for Refugees (UNHCR) 25,562,727 393,157,244 305,040,047 723,760,018 
United Nations Migration Agency 
(IOM) 18,507,650 18,317,100 36,824,750 
United Nations Office for Project 
Services (UNOPS) 6,000,000 6,000,000 
United Nations Population Fund 
(UNFPA) 1,840,000 3,800,000 19,241,374 24,881,374 
Financial Requirements - UGANDA COUNTRY RRP

54 UGANDA R R P > JANUARY 2 0 1 9 - D E C E M B E R 2 0 2 0 
ORGANIZATION BURUNDI DRC & Other SOUTH 
SUDAN TOTAL 
United Nations World Food 
Programme (WFP) 10,679,263 168,751,671 335,539,875 514,970,809 
United Nations World Health 
Organization (WHO) 735,000 4,908,922 5,362,324 11,006,246 
War Child Canada (WCC) 3,397,500 3,397,500 
War Child Holland (WCH) 1,125,000 2,175,000 3,300,000 
Water Mission Uganda (WMU) 1,000,000 1,000,000 
Welthungerhilfe 2,800,000 2,800,000 
Windle International Uganda 756,000 1,945,944 2,701,944 
World Vision International (WVI) 5,310,480 17,000,000 22,310,480 
ZOA 1,600,000 1,600,000 
TOTAL 58,153,982 766,771,275 1,038,824,947 1,863,750,203 
By Sector & Refugee Population 
SECTOR BURUNDI DRC & Other SOUTH SUDAN TOTAL 
Protection 16,606,172 134,322,258 145,695,925 296,624,355 
Education 789,424 65,689,239 121,982,564 188,461,228 
Energy a& 
Environment 730,362 64,522,174 53,356,421 118,608,956 
Food Security 10,400,436 165,295,558 328,766,513 504,462,507 
Health & Nutrition 5,074,947 77,219,665 83,141,377 165,435,989 
Livelihoods & 
Resiliance 17,903,085 101,581,631 165,268,371 284,753,086 
Shelter & NFIs 5,442,746 75,966,548 60,414,541 141,823,835 
WASH 1,206,810 82,174,202 80,199,235 163,580,248 
TOTAL 58,153,982 766,771,275 1,038,824,947 1,863,750,203 
Financial Requirements - UGANDA COUNTRY RRP

ANNEX

56 UGANDA R R P > JANUARY 2 0 1 9 - D E C E M B E R 2 0 2 0 
Monitoring Framework 
South Sudan DRC and others Burundi 
Refugees Host Refugees Host Refugees Host 
OBJECTIVE: Registration conducted on an individual basis with minimum set of data required 
INDICATOR: # of refugees registered on an individual basis with minimum set of data required 
2019 1,112,025 Not applicable 509,366 Not applicable 43,230 Not applicable 
2020 1,074,266 Not applicable 539,554 Not applicable 42,094 Not applicable 
INDICATOR: % of refugees documented on an individual basis 
2019 100% Not applicable 100% Not applicable 100% Not applicable 
2020 100% Not applicable 100% Not applicable 100% Not applicable 
INDICATOR: # of persons that have access to RSD procedures 
2019 Not applicable Not applicable 2,000 Not applicable 15,000 Not applicable 
2020 Not applicable Not applicable 2,000 Not applicable 15,000 Not applicable 
OBJECTIVE: Adequate and quality child protection services for children, including case management services, are provided in refugee and host 
communities 
INDICATOR: # of children with specific child protection needs receiving individual case management services 
2019 47,721 12,000 17,300 5,500 7,500 2,500 
2020 36,827 8,000 19,200 5,000 6,500 2,300 
INDICATOR: # of registered UASC in alternative care who receive regular monitoring and support 
2019 27,550 3,000 7,772 1,500 750 500 
2020 27,657 3,100 6,650 2,000 800 500 
INDICATOR: # of boys and girls registered and participating in psychosocial support services through structured activities at child friendly spaces 
2019 350,000 150,000 180,000 120,000 25,000 15,000 
2020 250,000 150,000 200,000 130,000 20,000 15,000 
OBJECTIVE: Effective and safe child protection systems that prevent and respond to child protection concerns in refugee and host communities are 
strengthened 
INDICATOR: # of reported cases of abuse, violence and exploitation receiving age and gender sensitive services in refugee and host communities 
2019 18,000 15,000 12,000 6,500 8,000 3,000 
2020 16,000 13,500 13,500 7,000 8,500 4,000 
INDICATOR: # of partner and government staff trained on child protection 
2019 5,467 3,347 2,543 1,130 40 22 
2020 5,100 3,262 2,594 1,186 35 22 
INDICATOR: # of functional community-based structures dedicated to child protection 
2019 4,453 1,648 850 50 150 30 
Protection 
Monitor ing Framework - ANNEX COUNTRY RRP

U G A N DA R R P > JA N UA R Y 2 0 1 9 - D E C EMB E R 2 0 2 0 57 
2020 4,218 1,638 5,229 2,101 145 30 
OBJECTIVE: Protection of and accountability to all refugees are strengthened through meaningful engagement with communities, with particular 
attention to at-risk groups 
INDICATOR: % of women in leadership structures and community groups for community self-management and empowerment 
2019 48 Not applicable 48 Not applicable 48 Not applicable 
2020 50 Not applicable 50 Not applicable 50 Not applicable 
INDICATOR: # of complaints addressed through effective feedback mechanisms 
2019 30,447 9,898 16,166 4,913 800 200 
2020 35,490 11,698 19,414 6,071 700 150 
INDICATOR: # of persons with specific needs provided with targeted support 
2019 83,000 20,200 48,000 12,000 5,243 1073 
2020 81,000 20,000 51,000 12,750 5,291 1088 
OBJECTIVE:Peaceful co-existence among communities strengthened 
INDICATOR: # of reported incidents of conflict within refugee communities 
2019 70 Not applicable 40 Not applicable 10 Not applicable 
2020 60 Not applicable 30 Not applicable 8 Not applicable 
INDICATOR:# of reported incidents of conflict between host and refugee community 
2019 70 Not applicable 40 Not applicable 12 Not applicable 
2020 60 Not applicable 30 Not applicable 10 
INDICATOR: # of refugees receiving psychosocial support 
2019 400,000 Not applicable 220,000 Not applicable 2,100 Not applicable 
2020 350,000 Not applicable 234,000 Not applicable 2,050 Not applicable 
OBJECTIVE: Protection systems are strengthened and refugees women and girls are aware of the existing referral pathways with the aim of ensuring 
their full enjoyment of rights, reduction of SGBV risks and reinforced multi-sectoral response including through mainstreaming of SGBV across all 
sectors Eff 
INDICATOR: # of SGBV awareness campaigns conducted for refugees and host community ( awareness campaigns, FGDs, IEC, trainings, media) 
2019 20,087 6,479 1,319 436 300 30 
2020 12,918 3,694 1,405 444 300 30 
INDICATOR: # of SGBV survivors identified and receiveing appropriate multi-sectoral support 
2019 14,767 3,589 3,227 788 600 129 
2020 12,439 3,307 5,539 3,720 583 137 
INDICATOR: # of functional structures (duty bearers) trained and able to support survivors 
2019 2993 1290 550 157 85 50 
2020 2889 1346 496 137 70 50 
OBJECTIVE: Physical safety, access to justice, rule of law and civilian character of the refugee settlements is assured and protection of human rights 
promoted in refugee settings 
INDICATOR: # of refugees receiving legal assistance and legal aid services 
2019 50,000 Not applicable 28,000 Not applicable 10,000 Not applicable 
2020 50,000 Not applicable 30,000 Not applicable 10,000 Not applicable 
INDICATOR: # of security packages provided for law enforcement 
2019 100 Not applicable 50 Not applicable 25 Not applicable 
2020 100 Not applicable 50 Not applicable 25 Not applicable 
Monitor ing Framework - ANNEX COUNTRY RRP

58 UGANDA R R P > JANUARY 2 0 1 9 - D E C E M B E R 2 0 2 0 
INDICATOR: # of refugees and host communities sensitized about the Ugandan and Refugee law 
2019 250,000 Not applicable 50,000 Not applicable 15,000 Not applicable 
2020 250,000 Not applicable 50,000 Not applicable 15,000 Not applicable 
South Sudan DRC and others Burundi 
Refugees Host Refugees Host Refugees Host 
OBJECTIVE: Equitable access and inclusive relevant learning opportunties increased 
INDICATOR: % children of school and non school age enrolled in pre-primary ECD 
2019 41% 41% 41% 41% 41% 41% 
2020 43% 43% 43% 43% 43% 43% 
INDICATOR: % children of school and non school age enrolled in Primary 
2019 61% 122% 61% 122% 61% 122% 
2020 63% 124% 63% 124% 63% 124% 
INDICATOR: % children of school and non school age enrolled in Secondary 
2019 15% 20% 15% 20% 15% 20% 
2020 18% 22% 18% 22% 18% 22% 
INDICATOR: # of children accessing non-formal education (includes non-formal Vocational Training, Lifeskills & Accelerated Education) 
2019 53,123 23,784 18,379 7,248 1,315 564 
2020 43,972 17,422 18,942 7,443 1,242 532 
OBJECTIVE: Delivery of quality education and training improved 
INDICATOR: # of teachers and head teachers in Primary Schools funded under Partner contribution (not under MoES payroll) 
2019 5,070 1,269 1,329 155 145 297 
2020 6,283 796 1,644 167 177 322 
INDICATOR:# of teachers trained on formal and non-formal Continuous Professional Development programmes (CPD) trainings aimed to support 
teacher professional development and strengthen the quality of in-classroom 
2019 10,472 4,505 6,226 1,431 48 14 
2020 10,568 4,319 6,254 1,458 48 38 
INDICATOR: # of learners transition from AEP to formal education 
2019 18,684 3,165 5,887 1,409 1,024 65 
2020 28,026 3,979 8,830 1,837 1,536 97 
INDICATOR: % of schools supervised at least once a term by the district education office/ DES/ MOES 
2019 21% 26% 21% 26% 21% 26% 
2020 27% 39% 27% 39% 27% 39% 
INDICATOR: # of pupils per teacher for Primary Schools 
2019 77 57 77 57 77 57 
Education 
Monitor ing Framework - ANNEX COUNTRY RRP

U G A N DA R R P > JA N UA R Y 2 0 1 9 - D E C EMB E R 2 0 2 0 59 
2020 71 55 71 55 71 55 
INDICATOR: # of pupils per classroom for Primary Schools 
2019 135 67 135 67 135 67 
2020 122 64 122 64 122 64 
INDICATOR: # of pupils per textbook for Primary Schools 
2019 6 3 6 3 6 3 
2020 4 3 4 3 4 3 
INDICATOR: # of pupils per stance for Primary Schools 
2019 92 53 92 53 92 53 
2020 81 53 81 53 81 53 
OBJECTIVE: Systems for effective delivery strengthened 
INDICATOR: # of districts with education coordination mechanism meeting at least 6 times a year 
2019 12 12 12 12 7 7 
2020 12 12 12 12 7 7 
INDICATOR: # of education related community structures (SMCs, CMCs, BOGs, PTAs) supported to monitor the quality of teaching & learning 
2019 1393 714 552 203 23 27 
2020 1325 766 598 226 27 36 
South Sudan DRC and others Burundi 
Refugees Host Refugees Host Refugees Host 
OBJECTIVE: Environment and natural resources protected and restored and green livelihoods promoted using a catchment-based approach 
INDICATOR: % extent environmental risks associated with the operation are mitigated 
2019 70% 70% 67% 67% 65% 65% 
2020 90% 90% 87% 87% 85% 85% 
INDICATOR: # hectares of forests, wetlands, riverbanks and lakeshores protected and restored 
2019 13,900 13,900 7,290 7,290 540 540 
2020 26,857 26,857 15,372 15,372 1,052 1,052 
INDICATOR: # of households generating income from ‘green livelihoods’ (agroforestry, beekeeping, energy-saving tech, sustainable construction) 
2019 25,420 13,340 7,078 14,107 324 1,488 
2020 35,640 23,059 11,782 21,533 526 2,266 
OBJECTIVE: Access to sufficient and sustainable basic energy services for lighting, power and cooking increased and climate change drivers mitigated 
with reduced reliance on wood and fossil fuels 
INDICATOR: # of targeted households that self-report using fuel-efficient cook-stove to cook the main meal 
2019 187,517 126,473 73,448 176,340 5,404 18,606 
2020 224,158 183,987 115,753 264,510 7,893 27,909 
Energy & Environment 
Monitor ing Framework - ANNEX COUNTRY RRP

60 UGANDA R R P > JANUARY 2 0 1 9 - D E C E M B E R 2 0 2 0 
INDICATOR: # of households using alternative and/or renewable energy (e.g. solar, biogas, ethanol, briquette, lpg) 
2019 247,717 178,028 89,648 70,561 8,011 10,762 
2020 239,993 182,470 107,119 71,740 8,278 10,857 
INDICATOR: # of institutions (Health, Education, Reception) using sustainable energy (e.g. institutional stoves, solar, biogas, ethanol, briquette, lpg) 
2019 245 94 7 
2020 350 104 10 
OBJECTIVE: Energy, environment and climate response planning, coordination, implementation, monitoring strengthened and environmental mitigation 
measures mainstreamed across all sectors 
INDICATOR: # of Environment Impact Assessments completed for integration into sub-catchment management and physical plans 
2019 4 3 0 
2020 6 5 0 
INDICATOR: # of extensions workers, partner staff, and government officials receiving environmental orientation across all sectors 
2019 5,000 2,500 500 
2020 10,000 5,000 1,000 
INDICATOR: % of total refugee response operational spending on implemented energy, environment and climate-resilient interventions mainstreamed 
into other sector 
2019 1% 1% 1% 1% 1% 1% 
2020 2% 2% 2% 2% 2% 2% 
Food Security 
South Sudan DRC and others Burundi 
Refugees Host Refugees Host Refugees Host 
OBJECTIVE: Refugees have access to adequate nutritious food to meet their basic food and nutrition needs 
INDICATOR: # of refugees receiving in-kind food assistance 
2019 879,137 Not applicable 350,585 Not applicable 27,471 Not applicable 
2020 848,720 Not applicable 372,997 Not applicable 26,661 Not applicable 
INDICATOR: # of refugees receiving cash 
2019 219,784 Not applicable 145,987 Not applicable 6,868 Not applicable 
2020 212,180 Not applicable 155,507 Not applicable 6,665 Not applicable 
INDICATOR: % of HH with poor or borderline Food Consumption Score (<20%) 
2019 30% Not applicable 40% Not applicable 35% Not applicable 
2020 18% Not applicable 20% Not applicable 19% Not applicable 
OBJECTIVE: Targeted food assistance provided to the most vulnerable refugee households based on assessed needs 
INDICATOR: % of refugee households receiving targeted assistance 
2019 20% Not applicable 20% Not applicable 20% Not applicable 
2020 30% Not applicable 30% Not applicable 30% Not applicable 
Monitor ing Framework - ANNEX COUNTRY RRP

U G A N DA R R P > JA N UA R Y 2 0 1 9 - D E C EMB E R 2 0 2 0 61 
INDICATOR: % of HH with poor or borderline Food Consumption Score (<20%) 
2019 30% Not applicable 40% Not applicable 35% Not applicable 
2020 18% Not applicable 20% Not applicable 19% Not applicable 
INDICATOR: Coping Strategy Score of targeted refugee households (EVIs, PSN) 
2019 8.61 Not applicable 15 Not applicable 20 Not applicable 
2020 6 Not applicable 13 Not applicable 18 Not applicable 
OBJECTIVE: Food Assistance to refugees progressively linked to livelihood and self-reliance interventions to enhance resilience 
INDICATOR: % of refugees receiving food assistance and participating in livelihood programmes 
2019 10% Not applicable 10% Not applicable 20% Not applicable 
2020 20% Not applicable 20% Not applicable 20% Not applicable 
INDICATOR: % of host population participating in refugee livelihood activities 
2019 10% 10% 10% 
2020 20% 20% 20% 
Health & Nutrition 
South Sudan DRC and others Burundi 
Refugees Host Refugees Host Refugees Host 
OBJECTIVE: Provide emergency life-saving health and nutrition interventions for new refugee arrivals and strengthen outbreak preparedness and 
response 
INDICATOR: Under-five mortality ratev 
2019 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 
2020 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 
INDICATOR: Global Acute Malnutrition rate 
2019 5% 5% 5% 5% 5% 5% 
2020 5% 5% 5% 5% 5% 5% 
INDICATOR: Proportion of sites holding monthly Refugee health and nutrition coordination meeting chaired by MoH & DHOs 
2019 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 
2020 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 
OBJECTIVE: Increase equitable access to and utilization of integrated quality health services for refugees and host communities across all the phases 
of displacement 
INDICATOR: Outpatient utilization rate 
2019 2 2 2 2 2 2 
2020 2 2 2 2 2 2 
INDICATOR: Health facility delivery rate 
2019 95% 95% 95% 95% 95% 95% 
2020 95% 95% 95% 95% 95% 95% 
Monitor ing Framework - ANNEX COUNTRY RRP

62 UGANDA R R P > JANUARY 2 0 1 9 - D E C E M B E R 2 0 2 0 
INDICATOR: Immunization coverage rate 
2019 95% 95% 95% 95% 95% 95% 
2020 95% 95% 95% 95% 95% 95% 
INDICATOR: Severe Acute Malnutrition recovery rate 
2019 75% 75% 75% 75% 75% 75% 
2020 75% 75% 75% 75% 75% 75% 
INDICATOR: Tuberculosis case detection rates/100,000 
2019 253 253 253 253 253 253 
2020 253 253 253 253 253 253 
OBJECTIVE: Strengthen the health care system to cope with the increased demand for health services by refugees and host population 
INDICATOR: Proportion of refugee serving health facilities accredited by Ministry of Health in refugee hosting districts 
2019 50% 50% 50% 50% 100% 50% 
2020 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 
INDICATOR: Proportion of Health Center IV and District referral hospitals supported (Infrastructure, HR and commodities) 
2019 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 
2020 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 
INDICATOR: Consultation per clinician per day in refugee hosting districts 
2019 50 50 50 50 50 50 
2020 50 50 50 50 50 50 
Livelihoods & Resiliance 
South Sudan DRC and others Burundi 
Refugees Host Refugees Host Refugees Host 
OBJECTIVE: Emergency livelihood support to complement basic household needs is provided 
INDICATOR: Coping Strategy Index Score 
2019 0.12 0.23 0.108938 0.247218 0.123730 0.247218 
2020 0.16 0.28 0.148938 0.297218 0.163730 0.297218 
INDICATOR: Food Consumption per capita/Month 
2019 13 16 16.97737 18.28355 14.63141 18.28355 
2020 16 19 19.97737 21.28355 17.63141 21.28355 
INDICATOR: # of refugee and host community HH receiving emergency livelihood support 
2019 152,252 51,674 70,774 32,019 5,945 4,373 
2020 159,490 52,858 67,827 31,875 4,990 3,033 
OBJECTIVE: Household livelihood strategies are strengthened to support household self-reliance 
INDICATOR: Composite Productive Assets Index 
2019 0.53 0.71 0.346882 0.461365 0.459640 0.461365 
Monitor ing Framework - ANNEX COUNTRY RRP

U G A N DA R R P > JA N UA R Y 2 0 1 9 - D E C EMB E R 2 0 2 0 63 
2020 0.65 0.85 0.466882 0.601365 0.579640 0.601365 
INDICATOR: Average # of income generating activities (IGA) per household 
2019 1.8 2.2 2.3 2.2 2.5 2.2 
2020 2.1 2.5 2.6 2.5 2.8 2.5 
INDICATOR: Wealth Index 
2019 0.6 0.7 0.5601924 1.019296 0.7287044 1.019296 
2020 0.65 0.75 0.6101924 1.069296 0.7787044 1.069296 
OBJECTIVE: The enabling environment is reinforced to support resilient livelihoods 
INDICATOR: % of targeted population employed or self-employed in sustainable livelihoods activities over the last 12 months 
2019 33% 54% 38% 54% 40% 54% 
2020 38% 59% 43% 59% 45% 59% 
INDICATOR: Asset benefit indicator 
2019 12.5% 12.5% 12.5% 12.5% 12.5% 12.5% 
2020 25% 25% 25% 25% 25% 25% 
INDICATOR: % of targeted population with access to services through the DLG and private sector to develop their livelihood activity 
2019 7% 16% 7% 7% 8% 7% 
2020 10% 19% 10% 10% 11% 10% 
Shelter, Infrastuctures & NFIs 
South Sudan DRC and others Burundi 
Refugees Host Refugees Host Refugees Host 
OBJECTIVE: Ensure the minimum NFI standards for all refugees are met 
INDICATOR: # of newly arrived refugee households receiving core relief items 
2019 5,000 Not applicable 10,000 Not applicable 666 Not applicable 
2020 17,500 Not applicable 35,000 Not applicable 2,332 Not applicable 
INDICATOR: # of stabilised refugee households benefiting from replenishment NFIs 
2019 139,000 Not applicable 63,600 Not applicable 7,200 Not applicable 
2020 220,175 Not applicable 106,791 Not applicable 12,523 Not applicable 
INDICATOR: # of refugee households who receive cash-based NFI assistance 
2019 69,502 Not applicable 31,835 Not applicable 3,602 Not applicable 
2020 73,392 Not applicable 35,597 Not applicable 4,175 Not applicable 
OBJECTIVE: Access to improved and sustainable shelters for refugee households is increased 
INDICATOR: # of newly arrived refugee households provided with emergency shelter support 
2019 5,000 Not applicable 10,000 Not applicable 666 Not applicable 
Monitor ing Framework - ANNEX COUNTRY RRP

64 UGANDA R R P > JANUARY 2 0 1 9 - D E C E M B E R 2 0 2 0 
2020 17,500 Not applicable 35,000 Not applicable 2,332 Not applicable 
INDICATOR # of individuals (refugees + hosts) receiving sustainable shelter construction training 
2019 2,100 900 2,570 450 210 90 
2020 4,200 1,800 2,100 900 420 180 
INDICATOR: # of refugee and host community households with specific needs assisted with semi-permanent shelters 
2019 8,000 1,600 6,000 1,200 500 100 
2020 73,120 Not available 24,330 Not available 2,295 Not available 
OBJECTIVE: Integration of settlement plans with local government plans for maximized land use is improved 
INDICATOR: # of settlements benefitting from integrated local physical development plans based on Environment and Social Impact Assessments 
2019 11 Not applicable 1 Not applicable 1 Not applicable 
2020 26 Not applicable 5 Not applicable 2 Not applicable 
INDICATOR: # of kms of roads rehabilitated (including roadside vegetation) for all-year access to community services 
2019 60 60 50 50 10 10 
2020 120 120 100 100 20 20 
INDICATOR: # of energy-saving street lights installed in refugee hosting areas (excluding staff institutions) 
2019 250 250 150 150 50 50 
2020 500 500 300 300 100 100 
OBJECTIVE: Multi-sectoral support services for the refugee response provided 
INDICATOR: # of response activities that receive necessary delivery of logistics 
2019 Not available Not available Not available Not available Not available Not available 
2020 Not available Not available Not available Not available Not available Not available 
INDICATOR: # of information management products in support of inter-agency operational coordination 
2019 100 50 502 1,007 100 50 
2020 100 50 380 900 100 50 
INDICATOR: # of technical needs assessments conducted 
2019 4 4 58 82 4 4 
2020 4 4 66 97 4 4 
WASH 
South Sudan DRC and others Burundi 
Refugees Host Refugees Host Refugees Host 
OBJECTIVE: Access to water supply for refugees and hosting populations improved 
INDICATOR: # of litres per person per day 
2019 20.0 20.0 20.0 20.0 20.0 20.0 
2020 20.0 20.0 20.0 20.0 20.0 20.0 
Monitor ing Framework - ANNEX COUNTRY RRP

U G A N DA R R P > JA N UA R Y 2 0 1 9 - D E C EMB E R 2 0 2 0 65 
INDICATOR: % of water meeting minimum quality standards ( FRC and/or E-Coli standards) 
2019 100 100 100 100 100 100 
2020 100 100 100 100 100 100 
INDICATOR: % of water pumped through renewable energy (solar or grid) 
2019 68 68 56 56 56 56 
2020 71 71 75 75 75 75 
OBJECTIVE: Access to sanitation and hygiene services for refugees and hosting population improved 
INDICATOR: % household latrine coverage 
2019 86 85 90 85 90 85 
2020 100 100 100 100 100 100 
INDICATOR % of persons with knowledge on 3 critical handwashing times 
2019 78 60 95 60 78 60 
2020 85 85 85 85 85 85 
INDICATOR: # of institutional sanitation facilities constructed (schools, health centres, markets) 
2019 431 170 811 243 23 7 
2020 471 141 291 87 10 3 
OBJECTIVE: Institutions for effective management and provision of water and sanitation at national, regional and lower levels considering refugee 
settlements and host communities strengthened 
INDICATOR: % of water schemes designs reviewed, optimized and approved by Ministry of Water & Environment Approval committee 
2019 100 Not availalbe 100 Not available 100 Not available 
2020 100 Not availalbe 100 Not available 100 Not available 
INDICATOR: # of water schemes under management of utilities (NWSC or Umbrella Organisations) 
2019 22 Not available 12 Not available 0 Not available 
2020 120 Not available 12 Not available 4 Not available 
INDICATOR:# of Catchment Management Committees with refugees included as members 
2019 38 Not available 16 Not available 1 Not available 
2020 17 Not available 13 Not available 1 Not available 
Monitor ing Framework - ANNEX COUNTRY RRP

66 UGANDA R R P > JANUARY 2 0 1 9 - D E C E M B E R 2 0 2 0 
2019 Financial Requirements 
Summary 
ORGANIZATION BURUNDI DRC & Other SOUTH 
SUDAN TOTAL 
Action Against Hunger (ACF) 2,900,000 3,500,000 6,400,000 
African Women and Youth Action for 
Development (AWYAD) 200,000 300,000 500,000 
Agency for Technical Cooperation 
and Development (ACTED) 500,000 500,000 1,000,000 
American Refugee Committee (ARC) 326,273 2,114,516 2,006,597 4,447,386 
Association for Aid and Relief, Japan 
(AAR Japan) 1,000,000 1,000,000 
Association of Volunteers in 
Internation Service (AVSI) 8,465,000 2,587,510 11,052,510 
Building Resources Across 
Communities (BRAC) 200,000 350,000 550,000 
Care and Assistance For Forced 
Migrants (CAFOMI) 435,686 465,247 1,608,405 2,509,338 
CARE International 2,525,000 5,749,197 8,274,197 
Caritas Uganda 1,559,603 1,559,603 
Catholic Organization for Relied and 
Development Aid (CORDAID) 1,000,000 1,584,000 2,584,000 
Catholic Relief Services 2,734,961 4,685,415 7,420,376 
Cooperazione e Sviluppo (CESVI) 350,000 350,000 
DanChurchAid (DCA) 2,470,000 2,470,000 
Danish Refugee Council (DRC) 16,000,000 20,000,000 36,000,000 
Enabel 3,597,781 3,597,781 
Finn Church Aid (FCA) 650,000 2,600,000 3,250,000 
Food for the Hungry (FH) 1,782,797 1,782,797 
Humane Africa Mission 450,000 1,200,000 1,650,000 
Humanitarian OpenStreetMap Team 
(HOT) 400,000 400,000 
Humanity & Inclusion (HI) 500,000 500,000 
IMPACT Initiatives 15,471 208,718 397,962 622,151 
Inter-church Organization for 
Development Cooperation (ICCO) 251,074 251,074 
International Aid Services (IAS) 250,000 225,706 475,706 
International Rescue Committee (IRC) 1,760,469 1,760,469 
IsraAid 120,000 120,000 
Johanniter 260,000 300,000 560,000 
2019 Financial Requirements Summary - ANNEX COUNTRY RRP

U G A N DA R R P > JA N UA R Y 2 0 1 9 - D E C EMB E R 2 0 2 0 67 
ORGANIZATION BURUNDI DRC & Other SOUTH 
SUDAN TOTAL 
Kabarole Research and Resource 
Centre (KRC) 646,141 646,141 
Lutheran World Federation (LWF) 3,778,725 6,471,870 10,250,595 
Lutheran World Relief (LWR) 200,000 300,000 500,000 
Malteser International 1,299,513 1,299,513 
Medical Teams International (MTI) 1,123,778 1,578,370 2,702,148 
Mercy Corps 2,500,000 2,500,000 
Norwegian Refugee Council (NRC) 5,270,707 15,932,411 21,203,118 
OXFAM 3,044,153 13,653,517 16,697,670 
Plan International (PI) 1,841,174 1,841,174 
Right to Play (RtP) 700,000 700,000 
Samaritan's Purse (SP) 620,000 400,000 1,020,000 
Save the Children International (SCI) 3,941,834 7,359,143 11,300,977 
Self Help Africa 280,000 280,000 
TPO Uganda 1,338,945 1,338,945 
TROCAIRE (Only operational in 
Palabek Settlement) 600,000 600,000 
Tutapona Trauma Rehabilitation (TTR) 150,000 150,000 
Uganda Red Cross Society (URCS) 35,000 1,507,521 2,760,039 4,302,560 
United Nations Children's Fund 
(UNICEF) 3,615,469 15,320,404 29,253,093 48,188,966 
United Nations Development 
Programme (UNDP) 610,000 1,420,000 6,980,000 9,010,000 
United Nations Entity for Gender 
Equality and the Empowerment of 
Women (UN WOMEN) 
3,250,000 3,250,000 
United Nations Food and Agriculture 
Organization (FAO) 4,970,061 9,576,326 14,637,369 29,183,756 
United Nations High Commissioner 
for Refugees (UNHCR) 12,951,339 225,676,782 210,000,000 448,628,121 
United Nations Migration Agency 
(IOM) 11,520,950 10,291,400 21,812,350 
United Nations Office for Project 
Services (UNOPS) 3,000,000 3,000,000 
United Nations Population Fund 
(UNFPA) 920,000 1,900,000 9,620,687 12,440,687 
United Nations World Food 
Programme (WFP) 5,449,246 86,979,077 170,802,316 263,230,639 
United Nations World Health 
Organization (WHO) 350,000 2,337,582 2,553,488 5,241,070 
War Child Canada (WCC) 1,270,000 1,270,000 
War Child Holland (WCH) 775,000 1,125,000 1,900,000 
Water Mission Uganda (WMU) 400,000 400,000 
2019 Financial Requirements Summary - ANNEX COUNTRY RRP

68 UGANDA R R P > JANUARY 2 0 1 9 - D E C E M B E R 2 0 2 0 
ORGANIZATION BURUNDI DRC & Other SOUTH 
SUDAN TOTAL 
Welthungerhilfe 1,800,000 1,800,000 
Windle International Uganda 378,000 972,972 1,350,972 
World Vision International (WVI) 1,460,480 8,000,000 9,460,480 
ZOA 1,100,000 1,100,000 
TOTAL 29,678,545 416,800,902 593,207,823 1,039,687,270 
By Sector & Refugee Population 
SECTOR BURUNDI DRC& Other SOUTH SUDAN TOTAL 
Protection 8,430,751 68,950,462 87,151,729 296,624,355 
Education 412,682 55,329,717 74,794,467 188,461,228 
Energy a& 
Environment 367,200 32,776,411 33,975,028 118,608,956 
Food Security 5,311,031 85,441,454 167,662,951 504,462,507 
Health & Nutrition 2,544,974 39,397,165 49,859,906 165,435,989 
Livelihoods & 
Resiliance 9,071,361 51,104,059 92,823,184 284,753,086 
Shelter & NFIs 2,757,541 38,514,513 38,706,933 141,823,835 
WASH 783,005 45,287,122 48,233,625 163,580,248 
TOTAL 29,678,545 416,800,902 593,207,823 1,039,687,270 
2019 Financial Requirements Summary - ANNEX COUNTRY RRP

U G A N DA R R P > JA N UA R Y 2 0 1 9 - D E C EMB E R 2 0 2 0 69 
2020 Financial Requirements 
Summary 
ORGANIZATION BURUNDI DRC & Other SOUTH 
SUDAN TOTAL 
Action Against Hunger (ACF) 2,900,000 3,500,000 6,400,000 
African Women and Youth Action for 
Development (AWYAD) 300,000 300,000 600,000 
Agency for Technical Cooperation 
and Development (ACTED) 1,000,000 1,000,000 2,000,000 
American Refugee Committee (ARC) 326,784 2,208,578 2,014,430 4,549,792 
Association for Aid and Relief, Japan 
(AAR Japan) 1,000,000 1,000,000 
Association of Volunteers in 
Internation Service (AVSI) 7,340,000 460,277 7,800,277 
Building Resources Across 
Communities (BRAC) 200,000 350,000 550,000 
Care and Assistance For Forced 
Migrants (CAFOMI) 518,680 571,557 1,212,868 2,303,105 
CARE International 3,525,000 4,048,406 7,573,406 
Caritas Uganda 1,350,000 1,350,000 
Catholic Organization for Relied and 
Development Aid (CORDAID) 1,563,000 2,147,000 3,710,000 
Catholic Relief Services 4,219,902 4,786,362 9,006,264 
Cooperazione e Sviluppo (CESVI) 300,000 300,000 
DanChurchAid (DCA) 3,100,000 3,100,000 
Danish Refugee Council (DRC) 13,500,000 13,199,975 26,699,975 
Enabel 549,753 549,753 
Finn Church Aid (FCA) 650,000 2,600,000 3,250,000 
Food for the Hungry (FH) 2,200,000 2,200,000 
Humane Africa Mission 450,000 1,150,000 1,600,000 
Humanitarian OpenStreetMap Team 
(HOT) 500,000 500,000 
Humanity & Inclusion (HI) 400,000 400,000 
IMPACT Initiatives 15,127 220,969 386,054 622,150 
Inter-church Organization for 
Development Cooperation (ICCO) 210,115 210,115 
International Aid Services (IAS) - 95,809 95,809 
International Rescue Committee (IRC) 1,465,045 1,465,045 
IsraAid 120,000 120,000 
Johanniter 255,000 267,000 522,000 
2020 Financial Requirements Summary - ANNEX COUNTRY RRP

70 UGANDA R R P > JANUARY 2 0 1 9 - D E C E M B E R 2 0 2 0 
ORGANIZATION BURUNDI DRC & Other SOUTH 
SUDAN TOTAL 
Kabarole Research and Resource 
Centre (KRC) 795,688 795,688 
Lutheran World Federation (LWF) 3,385,438 5,117,388 8,502,826 
Lutheran World Relief (LWR) 200,000 300,000 500,000 
Malteser International 946,200 946,200 
Medical Teams International (MTI) 1,000,000 1,000,000 2,000,000 
Mercy Corps 1,000,000 1,000,000 
Norwegian Refugee Council (NRC) 6,948,342 12,885,700 19,834,042 
OXFAM 2,587,530 13,115,233 15,702,763 
Plan International (PI) 1,552,099 1,552,099 
Right to Play (RtP) 1,000,000 1,000,000 
Samaritan's Purse (SP) 620,000 310,000 930,000 
Save the Children International (SCI) 3,734,587 7,370,925 11,105,512 
Self Help Africa 420,000 420,000 
TPO Uganda 1,540,000 1,540,000 
TROCAIRE (Only operational in 
Palabek Settlement) 750,000 750,000 
Tutapona Trauma Rehabilitation (TTR) 150,000 150,000 
Uganda Red Cross Society (URCS) 25,000 1,419,889 1,409,650 2,854,539 
United Nations Children's Fund 
(UNICEF) 3,052,378 13,956,550 26,697,100 43,706,028 
United Nations Development 
Programme (UNDP) 600,000 1,450,000 6,460,000 8,510,000 
United Nations Entity for Gender 
Equality and the Empowerment of 
Women (UN WOMEN) 
3,250,000 3,250,000 
United Nations Food and Agriculture 
Organization (FAO) 4,791,063 9,179,247 13,646,433 27,616,743 
United Nations High Commissioner 
for Refugees (UNHCR) 12,611,388 167,480,462 95,040,047 275,131,897 
United Nations Migration Agency 
(IOM) 6,986,700 8,025,700 15,012,400 
United Nations Office for Project 
Services (UNOPS) 3,000,000 3,000,000 
United Nations Population Fund 
(UNFPA) 920,000 1,900,000 9,620,687 12,440,687 
United Nations World Food 
Programme (WFP) 5,230,017 81,772,594 164,737,559 251,740,170 
United Nations World Health 
Organization (WHO) 385,000 2,571,340 2,808,836 5,765,176 
War Child Canada (WCC) 2,127,500 2,127,500 
War Child Holland (WCH) 350,000 1,050,000 1,400,000 
Water Mission Uganda (WMU) 600,000 600,000 
2020 Financial Requirements Summary - ANNEX COUNTRY RRP

U G A N DA R R P > JA N UA R Y 2 0 1 9 - D E C EMB E R 2 0 2 0 71 
ORGANIZATION BURUNDI DRC & Other SOUTH 
SUDAN TOTAL 
Welthungerhilfe 1,000,000 1,000,000 
Windle International Uganda 378,000 972,972 1,350,972 
World Vision International (WVI) 3,850,000 9,000,000 12,850,000 
ZOA 500,000 500,000 
TOTAL 28,475,437 349,970,373 445,617,123 824,062,933 
By Sector & Refugee Population 
SECTOR BURUNDI DRC & Other SOUTH SUDAN TOTAL 
Protection 8,175,421 65,371,796 58,544,196 132,091,413 
Education 376,742 10,359,522 47,188,097 51,490,317 
Energy a& 
Environment 363,162 31,745,763 19,381,392 246,047,071 
Food Security 5,089,405 79,854,104 161,103,562 73,633,944 
Health & Nutrition 2,529,973 37,822,500 33,281,471 131,754,483 
Livelihoods & 
Resiliance 8,831,724 50,477,572 72,445,187 132,091,413 
Shelter & NFIs 2,685,205 37,452,035 21,707,608 61,844,848 
WASH 423,805 36,887,080 31,965,610 69,276,495 
TOTAL 28,475,437 349,970,373 445,617,123 824,062,933 
2020 Financial Requirements Summary - ANNEX COUNTRY RRP

