MYANMAR 
Photo: UNICEF/Brown 
DEC 2018 
2019 
RESPONSE PLAN 
HUMANITARIAN 
JANUARY-DECEMBER 2019 
UNITED NATIONS AND PARTNERS HUMANITARIAN COUNTRY TEAM

02 
PART I: . . 
SHAN 
KACHIN 
SAGAING 
CHIN 
BAGO 
MAGWAY 
KAYIN 
RAKHINE 
MANDALAY 
AYEYARWADY 
KAYAH 
MON 
TANINTHARYI 
YANGON 
B a y 
o f 
B e n g a l 
Mekong 
Chao Phraya 
Bhramaputra 
Irrawaddy 
Salween 
ARUNACHAL PRADESH 
INDIA CHINA 
BHUTAN 
THAILAND 
BANGLADESH 
VIET NAM 
CAMBODIA 
LAO PEOPLE'S 
DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC 
Chinese Line 
Indian Line 
NAY PYI TAW 
TOTAL POPULATION 
OF MYANMAR 
53.8M 
PEOPLE 
IN NEED 
941,000 
PEOPLE 
TARGETED 
941,000 
REQUIREMENTS (US$) 
MILLIONS 
$202.2M 
HUMANITARIAN 
PARTNERS 
62 
# people targeted 
% of people by sex and age 
Women and girls 
Children (< 18 years) 
Elderly (> 60 years) 
RAKHINE 
715,000 people targeted 
(including 128,000 IDPs) 
KACHIN 
168,000 people targeted 
(including 97,000 IDPs) 
SHAN 
48,000 people targeted 
(including 9,000 IDPs) 
KAYIN 
10,000 people targeted 
(including 10,000 IDPs) 
51% 
42% 
6% 
52% 
42% 
7%
51% 
43% 
8% 
51% 
51% 
4%

03 
PART I: Foreword by the humanitarian coordinat or 
FOREWORD BY 
THE HUMANITARIAN 
COORDINATOR 
While much of Myanmar’s population continues to benefit 
from the ongoing process of political and economic reforms, 
there are close to one million people who remain in need 
of emergency assistance and protection as a result of 
ongoing crises in Rakhine, Kachin and Shan. In addition, 
despite significant progress and investments in disaster risk 
reduction, millions of people in different parts of Myanmar 
face the ever-present risk of natural disasters in one of Asia’s 
most disaster-prone countries. 
The aim of the 2019 Humanitarian Response Plan is to assist 
the Government in ensuring that these emergency needs 
are met and that, as the political transition in the country 
continues, not one single man, woman or child is left behind. 
The response plan sets out the framework within which 
the United Nations and its partners will respond to the 
humanitarian assistance and protection needs of crisisaffected 
people in Myanmar. The plan has been jointly 
developed by members of the Humanitarian Country 
Team in Myanmar, in consultation with a wide range of 
stakeholders including Government counterparts, local civil 
society, representatives of affected communities including the 
Rohingya, development actors, donors and others. 
The Humanitarian Country Team recognizes that 
humanitarian action is one critical component of a broader, 
long term engagement that is needed to address the wide 
range of humanitarian, development, human rights and 
peace-building challenges in Myanmar in a holistic fashion. 
To this end, the 2019 Humanitarian Response Plan is 
aligned with other key documents and strategies that aim 
to enhance coherence and complementarity across these 
sectors, such as the Final Report and Recommendations of 
the Advisory Commission on Rakhine State (August 2017) 
and the Strategic Framework for International Engagement in 
Rakhine (April 2018). 
The 2019 Humanitarian Response Plan is based on 
information from many different sources, including the 
Government, national institutions, United Nations agencies, 
international organizations and local civil society partners 
engaged in humanitarian response. The overall funding 
requested for the 2019 Humanitarian Response Plan is 
US$202 million, to assist approximately 941,000 vulnerable, 
crisis-affected people. The plan is based on the information 
available at the time of writing. If there are significant new 
developments in the coming months, or if new information 
becomes available that requires an adjustment in the 
assumptions and planning figures, the plan will be revised 
accordingly. 
The plan is part of a broader engagement by the United 
Nations and its partners to ensure that all people affected by 
conflict, violence, insecurity and/or natural disasters have 
access to the protection and assistance they need, with a 
particular focus on vulnerable people including women and 
children, the sick, the elderly and people with disabilities. 
The Humanitarian Country Team is committed to providing 
needs-based humanitarian assistance and protection, in 
accordance with the humanitarian principles of humanity, 
neutrality, impartiality and independence, and without any 
adverse distinction based on region, ethnicity, religion or 
citizenship status. 
Humanitarian partners remain committed to working with 
the Government and local authorities, as well as with a broad 
range of humanitarian and development actors, to address 
needs over the coming year. We look forward to supporting 
strengthened national capacities to prepare for and respond to 
humanitarian emergencies. 
Finally, I would like to thank all those donors and partners 
who continue to support our collective efforts to address 
humanitarian needs in Myanmar. Your continued support is 
vital to ensure that vulnerable, crisis-affected people get the 
humanitarian assistance and protection that they need. 
Knut Ostby 
United Nations Resident and Humanitarian Coordinator, ad interim

04 
PART I: FOREWORD BY THE HUMANITARIAN COORDINATOR A WOMAN CARRYING WATER IN A JAR 
IN KAUNG DOKE KHAR CAMP IN SITTWE 
Photo: UNICEF/Brown

05 
PART I: Foreword by the humanitarian coordinat or 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
PART I: COUNTRY STRATEGY 
Foreword by the Humanitarian Coordinator .............................. 3 
The humanitarian response plan at a glance ............................. 6 
Overview of the situation .............................................................. 7 
Strategic objectives ..................................................................... 17 
Response strategy ....................................................................... 18 
Operational capacity ................................................................... 24 
Humanitarian access ................................................................... 25 
Response monitoring .................................................................. 26 
Summary of needs, targets & requirements ............................ 27 
PART II: OPERATIONAL RESPONSE PLANS 
Education ...................................................................................... 30 
Food security ................................................................................ 31 
Health ............................................................................................ 32 
Nutrition ........................................................................................ 33 
Protection ..................................................................................... 34 
Shelter/NFI/CCCM ................................................................... 36 
WASH ............................................................................................ 37 
Coordination and Common Services ........................................ 38 
Guide to giving ............................................................................ 39 
PART III: ANNEXES 
Objectives, indicators & targets ................................................ 42 
Planning figures: people in need and targeted ...................... 46 
What if? ... we fail to respond .................................................... 48

06 
PART I: Humanitarian Response Plan at a glance 
HUMANITARIAN RESPONSE PLAN 
AT A GLANCE 
PEOPLE IN NEED 
941,000 
PEOPLE TARGETED 
941,000 
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 1 
Promote respect for human rights, 
ensure protection of civilians, 
and support durable solutions for 
internally displaced people and 
other crisis-affected populations 
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 3 
Contribute to strengthening the 
resilience of communities and 
building national capacities to 
prepare for and respond to natural 
disasters and other emergencies 
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 2 
Ensure that vulnerable, crisis-affected 
people have access to assistance, 
services and livelihoods opportunities 
OPERATIONAL PRESENCE: NUMBER OF PARTNERS 
62 
PEOPLE WHO NEED HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE 
941,000 
INTERNALLY DISPLACED 
244,000 
NON DISPLACED 
697,000 
CRITICAL EVENTS TIMELINE FOR 2019 
42 
26 
27 
Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec 
Cyclone Season Rainy Season 
Dry Season 
Cyclone Season 
500,000 
100,000 
REQUIREMENTS (US$) 
$202.2M
Kachin 
Shan 
Rakhine 
Internally Displaced 
Non Displaced 
4 
Kayin

07 
PART I: Overview of the SITUATION 
Drivers and underlying factors 
Humanitarian needs in Myanmar are characterized by a 
complex combination of vulnerability to natural disasters, 
food insecurity, armed conflict, inter-communal tensions, 
statelessness, institutionalised discrimination, protracted 
displacement, human trafficking and risky migration. The 
situation is compounded further by chronic poverty, intensified 
violence especially against children and women, and underlying 
inequalities, that exacerbate needs, vulnerabilities and 
marginalization of affected people in many parts of the country. 
The Government of Myanmar has made notable commitments 
and progress towards gender equality and empowerment of 
women and girls including through its National Strategic Plan 
for the Advancement of Women 2013-2022 with a dedicated 
focus on “women in emergencies”. However, due to restrictive 
socio-cultural norms and practices, gender disparities persist 
across the country, leaving women and girls in subordinate 
positions in households, communities, workplaces and society, 
undermining their overall capacities, potential and rights. 
Gender discrimination against women and girls across all 
areas of life prevents their equitable access to relief services, 
information, resources, justice, decision making, education, 
work and overall opportunities to participate in public life 
beyond the domestic sphere. 
Myanmar is ranked 85 out of 187 on the Gender Inequality 
Index, with only half of its women in the workforce, 
compared to 85 per cent of men. Women are also impacted 
by discriminatory formal and customary practices that inhibit 
their rights to land tenure, property ownership and inheritance 
as well as the overall justice system and legal services. Women’s 
networks, civil society organizations and gender equality 
advocates, including in conflict affected states, have identified 
the lack of capacities and opportunities for women to engage 
in planning, implementation and decision-making for 
humanitarian action, recovery and peace building, as a key gap 
for these processes to be effective, accountable and evidencebased. 
The challenges faced by women and girls are particularly 
pronounced in remote and conflict-affected areas, where they 
OVERVIEW OF 
THE SITUATION 
Myanmar’s democratically-elected government took office at the end of March 2016 with 
a popular mandate, generating unprecedented optimism. However, two years on, the 
government faces enormous challenges, particularly with regards to the peace process 
and Rakhine State. In Rakhine, the situation remains tense following the armed attacks and 
subsequent military operations and violence in 2017 that led to the exodus of over 700,000 
people – mostly Muslims who self-identify as Rohingya¹ – to Bangladesh. The Rohingya 
population that remains in Rakhine continues to face discriminatory policies and practices, 
including segregation, severe movement restrictions and denial of rights. In some areas, fear, 
distrust and hostility continues between communities, which particularly affects women and 
children. Incidents of intimidation, harassment, extortion and abuse continue to be reported 
across the state. The combination of protracted displacement, statelessness, segregation, 
limited access to livelihoods opportunities and quality services (such as health and education) 
exposes people to many risks and has led to widespread psychosocial distress and a 
high level of dependency on humanitarian assistance. In Kachin and Shan, armed conflict 
has intensified since the beginning of 2018, causing new and secondary displacement 
and putting many civilians at risk. Meanwhile, humanitarian partners – both national and 
international – continue to face challenges in carrying out their activities, particularly due to 
access constraints. The continued presence of landmines and explosive remnants of war also 
continue to pose a major threat to civilians while hampering access to livelihood opportunities 
and sustainable solutions. Floods in some parts of Myanmar in 2018 have exacerbated existing 
vulnerabilities and caused additional relief needs in several states. 
1. The term Rohingya Muslims is used in this document in recognition of the right of people to self-identify. Since there are both Rohingya and non-Rohingya Muslims in 
Rakhine, in some cases the more general term Muslims is used. The Government of the Republic of the Union of Myanmar objects to the use of the term Rohingya. 

08 
PART I: Overview of the SITUATION 
are exposed to protection risks and human rights violations 
including gender-based violence, sexual exploitation and 
abuse, early and forced marriage, trafficking as well as gendered 
barriers to accessing relief, services, information, income 
generating activities, community participation and decision 
making at all levels. Levels of maternal mortality are particularly 
high in remote and conflict-affected areas. Marginalization is 
further compounded for women and girls who are stateless, 
internally displaced, from ethnic/religious minority groups 
or who have disabilities. Others who often face challenges are 
pregnant and breastfeeding women, adolescent girls, young 
women, female heads of households, older women and lesbian, 
gay, bisexual, transgender, intersex persons. 
Humanitarian action in the country has provided opportunities 
to support the Government in transforming gender relations 
through the leadership and empowerment of women and girls, 
which is key to response effectiveness and communities’ longerterm 
resilience and social cohesion2. In the nexus between 
humanitarian response and development efforts, government 
representatives, including health service providers and officials 
of the Myanmar Police Force, are working together with United 
Nations agencies to address areas of reform in their response to 
and mainstreaming of gender-based violence. 
Child trafficking is a great concern especially for girls, who are 
reported to be sold as child-brides, including cross-border with 
China. Grave human rights violations especially against women 
and children, also remain a concern in Kachin, northern Shan 
and Rakhine. The highest number of documented incidents in 
2017 related to recruitment and use of children, followed by 
killing and maiming by landmines. These accounted for over 
35 per cent of the reported incidents, followed by abduction, 
attacks on schools and hospitals, and sexual violence. 
Verifiable data is not available on the number of children still 
associated with armed actors. The United Nations and the 
Government of Myanmar signed a Joint Action Plan in June 
2012 to end and prevent the use and recruitment of children 
by the Myanmar Military (Tatmadaw). Following the signature 
of the Joint Action Plan, the pace of release and reintegration 
of children has accelerated significantly. From June 2012 to 
August 2018, over 900 children and youths were released by 
the Tatmadaw under the framework of the Joint Action Plan, 
with the support of the Country Task Force on Monitoring 
and Reporting. At least 683 of these children and youths have 
received support for their reintegration. An additional 88 
children and young people, recruited while they were underage, 
were released outside of the Joint Action Plan framework 
since its signature. Release and reintegration of children 
associated with non-state armed groups has progressed at a 
slower pace and in a non-systematic manner. Increased efforts 
and resources are required to ensure that affected children 
can be released and reintegrated with the necessary support. 
The Government of Myanmar has shown interest in receiving 
training on the six grave violations, which will be an essential 
step towards preventing grave violations against children in 
armed conflicts. The efforts of the Government and its progress 
towards ending and preventing recruitment and use of children 
should also be acknowledged. 
Myanmar has the lowest life expectancy and the second-highest 
rate of infant and child mortality among the ASEAN countries. 
According to the Myanmar Living Condition Survey (2017), 
one in 25 children dies before their first birthday. In addition, 
29 per cent of children under five are moderately stunted and 8 
per cent are severely stunted. 
Persons with disabilities are also disproportionately affected 
in humanitarian emergencies, and face multiple barriers in 
accessing protection services and humanitarian assistance. 
They are particularly exposed to protection risks, particularly 
gender-based violence, including early marriage, exploitation 
Jun 2011 
Mass displacement 
due to conflicts in 
Kachin and northern Shan 
Jun 2012 
Violence in 
Rakhine leads to 
mass displacement 
15 Oct 2015 
Eight ethnic 
armed groups 
sign a Nationwide 
Ceasefire Agreement 
with the Government 
TIMELINE OF RECENT EVENTS 
2 0 1 2 
Jul 2015 
Floods and lanslides 
temporarily displace 
1.7 million people mostly in 
Chin and Rakhine states, and 
Magway and Sagaing regions 
2 0 1 1 2 0 1 5 
2. Myanmar ratified the United Nations Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) on 22 July 1997.

09 
PART I: Overview of the SITUATION 
and abuse, as well as trafficking. They often lack confidence and 
receive limited support to engage in decision-making processes 
that affect them in humanitarian emergencies. According to 
the 2014 Census, the nation’s disability rate is 4.6 per cent, 
representing a total of 2.3 million people, and the prevalence 
of disability increased with age and is more common among 
women, rural populations and the poorest older people. Both 
boys and girls with disabilities are less likely to attend school 
than children without disabilities. Labour force participation 
is lower for males and females with disabilities (22.9 per cent) 
when compared to the populations without disabilities (67.6 per 
cent). 
Some assessments carried out in Rakhine indicate that 64 per 
cent of persons living with a disability feel abandoned by their 
community and that their life is harder compared to others. 
In Kachin, recent situational analysis showed that 81 per cent 
of persons with a disability do not have any source of income 
in areas targeted by the assessment. While all displaced people 
in general are suffering from lack of livelihoods opportunities, 
displaced people with disabilities are further marginalized. 
The lack of access to medical services and difficulties in paying 
for health and physical rehabilitation services are the main 
factors contributing to long term impairments among the IDP 
population. 
Independent International Fact-Finding Mission on Myanmar 
In September 2018, an Independent International Fact-Finding Mission on Myanmar established 
by the Human Rights Council issued a report providing its detailed findings and recommendations. 
The report describes serious violations of human rights law as well as international humanitarian 
law in Kachin, Shan and Rakhine states. This includes the systematic targeting of civilians, including 
women and children, threatening their safety and dignity, and driving acute humanitarian need as a 
result of protracted or repeated displacement. The report concludes that many violations amount to 
the gravest crimes under international law. 
The report details instances of “forced displacement, confiscation and destruction of property, and 
denial of humanitarian assistance”. The report also notes that the lack of humanitarian access has led 
to “dire conditions” in some displacement camps in Kachin and Shan, “contributing to trafficking 
and raising other protection concerns”. The report notes that Muslim people living in central Rakhine 
face oppressive movement restrictions which limit their access to livelihoods, food and basic 
services including healthcare. In northern Rakhine, the report notes that similarly humanitarian 
access constraints have had “a serious adverse impact on the population, who are left without critical 
and lifesaving assistance, including access to food and health services.” 
The Myanmar Government objected to the formation of the Fact-Finding Mission and has expressed 
its serious concerns over the report. 
25 Aug 2017 
Armed attacks 
on police 
posts lead to a massive 
security operation in 
northern Rakhine. 
Over 600,000 people 
flee to Bangladesh 
24 Aug 2017 
Rakhine 
Advisory 
Commission, led by 
Kofi Annan, issues its 
final report 
Oct 2016 
Armed attacks on 
police posts lead to 
massive security operation 
in northern Rakhine. 
Over 80,000 people flee to 
Bangladesh 
Apr 2018 
Over 8,000 
people displaced 
by conflicts in 
several townships of 
Kachin State 
Jun 2018 
Tripartite 
MOU 
on assistance to 
repatriation process 
signed 
Jun-Sep 2018 
Over 200,000 
people temporarily 
displaced due to floods 
across the country 
2 0 1 6 2 0 1 7 2 0 1 8

10 
PART I: Overview of the SITUATION 
Rakhine State 
Rakhine is one of the least developed areas of Myanmar and has 
a diverse ethnic and religious population. Rakhine Buddhists 
make up the largest group. Muslims3 constitute the second 
largest group, the majority being stateless Rohingya, while a 
smaller number are Kaman. Other ethnic minorities include 
Chin, Daingnet, Khami, Maramagyi, Mro, Thet and Hindus. 
The United Nations and its humanitarian and development 
partners have been working in Rakhine for many years, 
addressing not only the specific needs of the stateless Rohingya 
population, but focusing also on addressing the needs of all 
communities. 
In August 2017, the Advisory Commission on Rakhine State, 
established by the Myanmar Government and led by former UN 
Secretary-General Kofi Annan, issued its final report, providing 
detailed recommendations aimed at achieving “a peaceful, fair 
and prosperous future for the people of Rakhine”. Although it 
was written prior to the events of 25 August 2017, the report’s 
observations and recommendations – which were welcomed by 
the Government of Myanmar – remain pertinent. The report 
emphasizes that Rakhine represents not only a development 
crisis and a security crisis affecting all communities, but also a 
human rights crisis. The report states the following: “While all 
communities have suffered from violence and abuse, protracted 
statelessness and profound discrimination have made the 
Muslim community particularly vulnerable to human rights 
violations… The community faces a number of restrictions 
which affect basic rights and many aspects of their daily lives”. 
Entrenched gender inequality and socio-cultural norms in all 
communities magnifies the impact of discrimination especially 
on women and girls, exacerbating their specific needs, creating 
barriers to their equitable access to information, services 
(including life-saving health services such as sexual and 
reproductive health interventions), aid, education, livelihoods, 
community engagement and overall decision making and 
leadership, and rendering them at greater risk of violence and 
hardship. Women and girls are at risk of gender-based violence, 
including trafficking, transactional sex, sexual exploitation and 
abuse, child marriage and forced marriage, while men and boys 
are more at risk of arrest, detention and forced labour. 
There are an estimated 596,000 stateless Rohingya who 
remain in Rakhine State following the armed attacks by the 
Arakan Rohingya Salvation Army (ARSA) and the subsequent 
security operations led by the Myanmar Military that resulted 
in the exodus of refugees – mostly stateless Rohingya – to 
Bangladesh in 2016-18 (over 90,000 between October 2016 
and August 2017, and over 700,000 more since August 2017). 
The violence in 2016 and 2017 also led to the temporary 
internal displacement of about 25,000 Rakhine Buddhists and 
people from ethnic minority groups, but all of these people 
subsequently returned or were resettled by the Government. 
Approximately 128,000 Muslims (of whom about 126,000 are 
stateless Rohingya) remain in camps or camp-like settings in 
central Rakhine, as a result of the violence in 2012. Children 
make up at least 53 per cent of this population, while women 
and children together make up about 78 per cent. The 
remaining estimated 470,000 non-displaced stateless Rohingya 
are spread across ten townships. 
In addition to the stateless Rohingya, there are an estimated 
117,000 people who continue to have humanitarian needs 
as a result of the violence in 2012, 2016 and 2017, and in 
view of the continued conflict, inter-communal tensions 
and insecurity. This includes vulnerable people in the ethnic 
Rakhine community and amongst ethnic minority groups, 
who are in need of humanitarian support as a result of food 
insecurity, inadequate access to healthcare and other factors. 
This humanitarian support is complemented by development 
assistance targeting all communities. 
The humanitarian situation in the three northern townships 
(Maungdaw, Buthidaung and Rathedaung) remains dire. Of 
particular concern is the scale and complexity of the needs 
in the Maungdaw area, largely as a result of the dramatic 
escalation in violence following the October 2016 and August 
2017 attacks and subsequent security operations. While the 
pace of departures has significantly slowed in 2018, continued 
departures from the northern townships into Bangladesh 
indicate an ongoing protection and human rights crisis with 
over 13,000 people crossing the border between January 
and August 2018. New refugees arriving in Bangladesh cited 
concerns for their own security and the pressure exerted on 
them to apply for the Identity Card for National Verification as 
main reasons for departing. Restrictions linked to citizenship 
status and documentation continue to severely affect freedom of 
movement and impact access to basic services and livelihoods 
for people, along with challenging local dynamics including 
inter-communal tensions and profound mistrust. 
In northern Rakhine, the Red Cross Movement and some UN 
staff have been granted access, along with staff from some other 
organizations such as the ASEAN Humanitarian Assistance 
Centre (AHA-Centre). However, severe access restrictions since 
25 August 2017 have prevented most humanitarian agencies 
from conducting independent assessments and have challenged 
the provision of critical life-saving assistance and protection 
services to affected communities. 
In June 2018, UNHCR and UNDP signed a tripartite 
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with the Government 
of Myanmar to support the Government’s efforts in creating 
conditions for the voluntary, safe, dignified and sustainable 
repatriation of refugees from Bangladesh and strengthening 
resilience and livelihoods for all communities living in 
3. The term Rohingya Muslims is used in this document in recognition of the right of people to self-identify. Since there are both Rohingya and non-Rohingya Muslims in 
Rakhine, in some cases the more general term Muslims is used. The Government of the Republic of the Union of Myanmar objects to the use of the term Rohingya. 

11 
PART I: Overview of the SITUATION 
Rakhine State. Currently, the UN does not consider conducive 
conditions in the northern part of Rakhine State are in place 
for the voluntary and sustainable return of refugees in safety 
and dignity. Significant efforts must be made to work towards 
improving the conditions of all communities in Rakhine State, 
and on fostering peaceful co-existence as well as addressing root 
causes by implementing the recommendations of the Rakhine 
Advisory Commission as endorsed by the Government, 
including those related to freedom of movement and a clear, 
voluntary and equal pathway to citizenship for all eligible 
individuals. Considering the scale of the protection crisis in 
Rakhine State and until there is concrete progress to address 
root causes – including freedom of movement, pathway 
to citizenship and inter-communal relations – sustainable, 
voluntary and dignified return of refugees to their places of 
origin or choice will remain elusive in 2019. 
In central Rakhine, Muslims (both Rohingya and Kaman) are 
increasingly isolated. They have been segregated since 2012 
and continue to face severe restrictions on their freedom of 
movement, limiting their access to livelihoods and essential 
services, including formal education and healthcare. This has 
exposed them to a wide range of protection risks and it has 
left them heavily dependent on humanitarian assistance. Lack 
of sufficient land in IDP camps, including sites located below 
sea-level, is a major challenge, hampering efforts to improve 
the living condition of IDPs. This results in overcrowding, poor 
environmental health conditions and has a disproportionate 
impact on women and children. Protracted displacement 
combined with the exposure to harsh weather conditions results 
in a constant need for shelter repairs. While IDPs continue 
to face overcrowding, significant efforts have been made in 
2017-18 to repair or reconstruct all IDP shelters in camps in 
central Rakhine, and further efforts are being made to mitigate 
protection risks and to improve weather resilience. Despite 
these efforts, inadequate privacy continues to create additional 
stress and risks for families and communities. It also exacerbates 
existing gender inequalities and has led to an increase in 
the incidence and severity of various forms of gender-based 
violence towards women and children, including intimate 
partner violence. The over-crowding also increases the risk of 
exposure to communicable diseases. 
Although there has long been a pattern of protection incidents 
(particularly those involving gender-based violence) being 
under-reported, from January to June 2018, a total of 117 
protection incidents affecting over 3,100 victims were reported 
in central Rakhine. This represents twice the number of 
incidents recorded during the same period the year before, with 
the total number of victims seven times higher. The incidents 
A CYCLONE-DAMAGED TEMPORARY 
LEARNING SPACE IN RAKHINE STATE 
Photo: UNICEF/Sirman

12 
PART I: Overview of the SITUATION 
include physical assaults, abduction, arbitrary arrests and other 
serious human rights violations. The most frequently reported 
violation affecting the largest number of displaced people 
continues to be extortion. In some cases, protection incidents, 
especially those related to extortion and gender-based violence, 
have involved Camp Management Committees members and 
leaders. The United Nations and its humanitarian partners 
continue to advocate for the reform of the Camp Management 
Committees. 
Protracted displacement, segregation, inter-communal 
tensions and widespread protection violations have a deep 
impact on the safety and psychosocial well-being of children 
and their caregivers. Children are reported to be at increased 
risk of being separated from their families, trafficked, forcibly 
married and recruited, exploited, sexually abused, neglected 
and severely mistreated by their families. In addition, there 
are reports of girls and women, especially belonging to the 
Muslim population, being sold as brides. The protracted 
exposure to these threats, coupled with the lack of a supportive 
family and community network, has a detrimental effect 
on the development of children and are likely to lead to the 
development of severe forms of psychosocial distress. 
The limited access to education also remains a great concern. 
A combination of movement restrictions, limited number of 
schools, teachers’ absenteeism and the protracted displacement 
crisis prevents many Muslim children from fully participating 
in the formal education system. The temporary learning spaces 
supported by humanitarian partners are under-resourced, 
lacking adequate materials and qualified teachers. Postprimary 
education – including middle school, high school, and 
university – is extremely limited for Muslim students. Options 
to attend these types of schools are all but non-existent for 
those living outside of Sittwe Township. For Muslims living in 
camp areas in Sittwe, some Government-run middle schools 
and one high school are available; however, these schools are 
severely under resourced and over-crowded. Restrictions 
make it extremely difficult for Muslim students to enrol in 
universities. The Ministry of Education is setting up distance 
education programmes to overcome some restriction of 
movement barriers, nevertheless the efficacy and outreach of 
these programmes will need to be evaluated. A lack of female 
educators at all levels limits the educational opportunities 
for Muslim girls, creating a self-perpetuating cycle of gender 
disparity. 
School drop-out and limited secondary education 
opportunities, along with the ongoing movement restrictions, 
has contributed to increased dysfunctional coping mechanisms 
among children and especially adolescents. Risky migration 
practices and the lack of documentation are contributing factors 
to family separation, child abuse, child trafficking, child labour 
exploitation and arbitrary arrest and detention of children. 
In its final report released in August 2017, among the total 
88 recommendations, the Advisory Commission on Rakhine 
State called upon the Government, with support from 
international partners, to ensure dignified living conditions 
in IDP camps pending the realization of sustainable solutions 
for the displaced. In an effort to support the Government, 
humanitarian partners started implementing a series of 
interventions aiming at improving living conditions in the 
camps and reducing protection risks. These efforts have been 
combined with advocacy for durable solutions to displacement. 
Meanwhile, the Government has taken measures to close some 
of the IDP camps in Rakhine and has been consulting the 
United Nations on its efforts to develop a national strategy for 
closure of camps. While the Advisory Commission on Rakhine 
State recommended the closure of IDP camps, it insisted that 
this should be in line with international standards and that 
“the aim should be to facilitate returns to places of origin as 
a matter of priority, or otherwise respect the choices of the 
displaced”. While the international community welcomes the 
development of a national strategy for the closure of camps and 
the consultations held with the UN to ensure the strategy is 
in line with international protection standards, the relocation 
processes to date across central Rakhine raise many concerns, 
the greatest of which is the risk of permanent segregation of 
the stateless Rohingya community. For example, in Myebon, 
IDPs were not given the option of returning to their places of 
origin and were instead relocated by the Government to a site 
adjacent to their existing camp and with no additional measures 
being taken to remove restrictions on freedom of movement. 
Indeed, unless the fundamental issue of freedom of movement 
is addressed, whatever improvements are made to the living 
conditions of displaced people – such as shelter upgrades – will 
not offer sustainable nor dignified solutions. Also, as underlined 
in the Commission’s final report, IDPs’ agreement to relocation 
to a new site should not be interpreted as a renunciation of 
their right to return to their place of origin once conditions are 
conducive. 
The United Nations and its partners continue to advocate 
for all people in Rakhine State to have unimpeded, sustained 
and timely access to healthcare, education, water/sanitation 
services, and livelihoods, irrespective of ethnicity, religion, 
citizenship status as well as gender, age, disability and other 
factors. Restrictions on freedom of movement and other 
restrictive policies and practices affecting the Rohingya 
community in central Rakhine mean that they are not able 
to travel freely to the nearest township hospital, even during 
medical emergencies, a situation which has led to increased 
risk of preventable morbidities and mortalities. This has a 
particularly severe impact on women seeking obstetric care, 
15 per cent of whom need emergency services. The Rakhine 
Advisory Commission recommended the expansion of primary 
health care services through an increased number of mobile 

13 
PART I: Overview of the SITUATION 
health clinics. Humanitarian organizations have been assisting 
the Ministry of Health and Sports to provide mobile clinics and 
other alternative solutions, but these are difficult to sustain and 
there are still gaps in healthcare services. 
Kachin State 
In Kachin State, as a result of the intensification of armed 
conflict in 2011 and ongoing hostilities since then, over 97,000 
people remain displaced across 140 camps or camp-like settings. 
Children make up about 46 per cent of this population, while 
women and children together make up about 75 per cent. About 
40 per cent of the displaced people are located in areas outside of 
the effective control of Government. 
In the first half of 2018, the conflict escalated across Kachin 
State both in terms of intensity and frequency with the use of 
heavy weapons, aerial bombardment and artillery in several 
areas. These clashes resulted in an additional displacement of 
more than 14,000 people across Chipwi, Hpakant, Injangyang, 
Mogaung, Momauk, Sumprabum, Tanai and Waingmaw 
townships, as well as the Laiza area. In some areas, fighting has 
occurred in or in close proximity to civilian areas, including 
villages and IDP camps. Lack of respect by parties to the conflict 
for the provisions of International Humanitarian Law on the 
protection of civilians remains a serious concern, and among 
those most vulnerable to violations are women, elderly people, 
children and people with disabilities. 
Civilians have been killed or injured in the fighting and shelling 
of villages. In addition, there are frequent reports of human rights 
violations and abuses, including arbitrary arrest and intimidation 
of those fleeing violence, forced recruitment (including of 
children), gender-based violence and restrictions on freedom 
of movement, including denial of safe passage. These risks also 
negatively impact the ability of displaced people to achieve selfreliance 
by hindering livelihoods activities. 
Among the risks to physical safety, landmines are a critical 
concern. UNICEF and the Mine Risk Working Group 
documented 185 mine-related casualties in the period from 
January to July 2018. Landmine incidents increased by 40 per 
cent and landmine casualties by 17 per cent over the same 
period in 2017. Due to access constraints, many casualties were 
unrecorded in conflict areas. Kachin has one of the highest rates 
of landmine incidents reported in the country and indeed the 
world, with civilians, including children, frequently killed or 
maimed due to explosions. In 2017, Kachin State represented 
44 per cent of total incidents and 43 per cent of total casualties 
reported in Myanmar. 
Grave child rights violations remain key concerns in conflictaffected 
areas, where incidents of recruitment and use of 
children by armed actors and killing and maiming of children 
have been documented. Violence and abuse against children 
are also widespread, in addition to exploitation of child 
labour and child trafficking, the latter affecting mainly girls. 
Malnourishment, sexual violence and neglect are also reported 
to be significant risks for boys and girls living in the State. 
Moreover, negative effects of recent and protracted displacement 
(e.g. loss of belongings, distressing experiences and challenging 
living conditions) are observed on children and caregivers’ 
psychosocial well-being. Prolonged and temporary family 
separation has also been reported as a key concern jeopardizing 
the safety of children. 
Kachin State also has the highest rate of children dropping out of 
school in the country; with 83 per cent of drop-outs occurring 
before grade five and almost 50 per cent before the last primary 
school grade. Children living in rural areas are 100 times more 
likely to drop-out of school compared to children living in urban 
areas. Poverty, child labour exploitation, and displacement due 
to conflict are among the contributing factors. Drop-out rates of 
displaced children aged 10-16 years are also considerably higher 
than most of the other States in Myanmar, including due to 
language barriers and unavailability of schools. 
The protracted nature of conflict and displacement is aggravating 
pre-existing vulnerabilities of persons with specific needs among 
the displaced, especially women, children, elderly people and 
persons with disabilities. Their situation is further compounded 
by extremely limited access to assistance and protection services 
as a result of decreasing humanitarian access and funding 
shortfalls. The result of this is a heightened vulnerability to risky 
migration practices leading to human trafficking, separation of 
children from primary caregivers who must migrate for work, 
early/forced marriage and other negative coping mechanisms 
manifesting in increased drug abuse and violence as well as in 
high rates of HIV transmission. 
With the ongoing conflict and lack of tangible progress on a 
reinstated ceasefire or the peace process, there has been little 
progress in finding durable solutions for the majority of the 
displaced people, most of whom have now been living in 
camps for seven years. There is a lack of consistent support to 
enable them to transition out of displacement and the lack of 
livelihood opportunities is one of the main challenges; women 
face particular challenges in accessing livelihoods. The loss of 
land and property in areas of origin, due to alleged appropriation 
of land by both internal and external actors, as well as burning 
of homes and the failure of the existing legal and judicial 
mechanisms to adequately protect the rights of those forcibly 
displaced from their lands, also pose serious challenges to the 
attainment of durable solutions to displacement. 
Against the backdrop of worsening security, humanitarian 
partners—national and international—have been facing 
increasing challenges in accessing affected people in Kachin State. 
The United Nations has not been permitted by the Government 
to travel to areas beyond Government control since June 2016, 

14 
PART I: Overview of the SITUATION 
inhibiting delivery of assistance, needs assessment and capacity 
building of local partners. While some international actors and 
local humanitarian organizations continue to operate, their 
activities are increasingly constrained. Access to areas within 
government control has also dramatically declined with most 
permissions for international staff only granted to the main 
towns, effectively cutting-off access to many displaced people 
who reside outside the main town centres. 
While local partners remain at the centre of humanitarian 
response in Kachin and have been able to deliver assistance 
to some remote areas inaccessible to international staff, 
sustained support is still needed to complement and 
enhance local efforts, given the growing humanitarian needs 
resulting from protracted displacement and renewed conflict. 
Humanitarian access constraints continue to undermine the 
quantity, quality and sustainability of assistance and services 
provided to displaced people, further exhausting their coping 
mechanisms after seven years of displacement. 
Shan State 
In northern Shan State, over 8,800 people remain displaced 
across 32 camps or camp-like settings. Children make up at 
least 48 per cent of this population, while women and children 
together make up about 77 per cent. Since the beginning of 
2018, there has been increased fighting in northern Shan 
state, which has resulted in civilian casualties and additional 
displacement in several conflict-affected townships. Most of 
the displacement was caused either by conflict between ethnic 
armed groups and the Myanmar army/militias, or as a result of 
fighting between different ethnic armed groups, illustrating the 
complexity of the situation. Temporary displacement followed 
by return to areas of origin once fighting subsides continues to 
be a key characteristic of displacement in northern Shan state, 
which presents challenges in humanitarian planning, response, 
and monitoring of the protection risks faced by returnees. 
In February and March 2018, about 5,000 civilians were 
temporarily displaced as a result of fighting. This includes 
fighting between the Military and Ta’ang National Liberation 
Army (TNLA) in Hseni, Kutkai and Namtu townships and 
clashes between the Restoration Council of Shan State/Shan 
State Army (RCSS/SSA) and TNLA in Kyaukme, Namhsan 
and Namtu townships. In July 2018, about 3,000 people were 
temporarily displaced in Mongkaing and Namtu townships 
following fighting between the RCSS/SSA and TNLA, and 
another 2,000 people were temporarily displaced due to 
fighting between and among different armed groups in August 
and September 2018. 
There are many protection concerns in northern Shan State 
related to the protracted nature of the conflict and continued 
and often multiple displacement. The most commonly 
reported protection threats include gender-based violence, 
forced recruitment, recruitment and use of children by armed 
forces, forced labour and portering, extremely limited access 
to humanitarian and other essential services (such as health 
and education), lack of documentation, appropriation of land 
or occupation of places of origin by parties to the conflict, 
and human trafficking particularly of women and children 
across the border to China. Informal reports indicate that child 
survivors of sexual violence are often forced to marry their 
perpetrator to protect the family against social shame. If the 
perpetrator is a member of an armed group, families are paid 
not to disclose the incident. Children are also reported to be at 
risk of unsafe migration and arbitrary detention. 
Landmine and unexploded ordinance contamination remains 
of great concern. Shan has one of the highest rates of landmine 
incidents reported in the country. In 2017, Shan State accounted 
for 37.8 per cent of total incidents and 43.2 per cent of total 
casualties reported in Myanmar. Out of 76 casualties in 2018 
which represents 41 per cent of countrywide casualties, 23 were 
children and eight of them died. 
Psychosocial distress and a feeling of hopelessness are also 
reported to be a major concern for children and families. 
Children affected by trafficking, exploitation and violence 
are likely to develop severe forms of distress if their needs for 
protection and psychosocial support are not met in a timely 
manner. Dysfunctional coping mechanisms among children, 
such as consumption of drugs, were also found to be common. In 
addition, children are often emotionally affected due to the lack 
of parental care or mistreatment experienced in their family, at 
school and in boarding houses. 
A Child Protection baseline survey recently conducted among 
displaced people living in camps showed that physical and 
emotional abuse are common, followed by neglect, sexual 
violence and harassment, and child marriage. Situations of 
highest risks for children are reported to be during firewood 
collection, at the boarding houses, in schools and at home. 
Unsafe facilities, such as WASH facilities, also contribute to 
increasing the risk of sexual assaults and violence against 
children. Outcomes from the survey indicate that children below 
14 years are the most affected by violence and abuse. 
As in Kachin, 2018 saw a further deterioration in access 
for humanitarian organizations in Shan State, leaving some 
locations which were previously accessible now off-limits. Access 
challenges have resulted in a reduction in the quantity and 
quality of humanitarian support to displaced people and other 
vulnerable communities. Such difficulties have resulted in the 
under-reporting of violations of International Humanitarian 
Law and human rights violations and abuses by parties to the 
conflict, hindering a comprehensive analysis of the threats 
faced by civilians affected by conflict. Furthermore, displaced 
people have found it difficult to restore their livelihoods and 
reduce their dependency on aid in an environment of continued 

15 
PART I: Overview of the SITUATION 
militarization and with extensive landmine contamination. With 
reduced livelihood opportunities for displaced people, there is 
a risk of more people resorting to negative coping mechanisms, 
such as drug and alcohol abuse, which are leading risk factors 
for gender-based violence and trafficking in the region with 
disproportionate impacts on women and girls. The ongoing 
conflict and related displacement also continue to strain the 
coping capacities of host communities. 
Chin State 
Situated in the remote mountain ranges of the western part 
of the country, Chin State is the poorest in Myanmar. It has 
limited roads, electricity, employment opportunities, health 
and education facilities and some people face food insecurity. 
Living conditions are challenging, but the conflict that had led 
to the flight of tens of thousands of Chin people to Malaysia, 
India and elsewhere ended with the signing of a ceasefire 
agreement between the Chin National Army and the Chin 
State Government in January 2012. Since November 2017, 
there have been some small-scale localized clashes between 
the Myanmar Military and the Arakan Army in Paletwa, Chin 
State, resulting in the displacement of hundreds of people 
within Chin State and also into neighbouring India. The 
IDPs have not yet been able to return home, with concerns 
over their safety and due to the threat of landmines. IDPs 
are receiving assistance from the Government and local 
organizations. 
South-eastern Myanmar 
South-eastern Myanmar has been affected by decades of armed 
conflict and multiple waves of displacement both inside the 
country and across the border into Thailand. Currently some 
120,000 persons are estimated to be in situation of protracted 
displacement throughout the south-east and close to 100,000 
refugees remain in nine temporary shelters in Thailand along 
the Myanmar border. Myanmar’s political and economic 
transition which began in 2010 was further bolstered by the 
signing of the Nationwide Ceasefire Agreement in October 
2015. While this agreement does not include all non-state 
actors, it does include key non-state actors in the south-east, 
including the Karen National Union (KNU), Democratic Karen 
Benevolent Army (DKBA) and Karen National Liberation Army 
- Peace Council (KPC), which are present in areas of refugee and 
IDP return. In February 2018, the New Mon State Party (NMSP) 
also signed the Nationwide Ceasefire Agreement. Groups that 
have not signed the Nationwide Ceasefire Agreement, such as 
the Karenni National Progressive Party (KNPP), have bilateral 
ceasefire agreements which remain in effect. 
Although the signing of the Nationwide Ceasefire Agreement 
and ongoing political dialogue through the ‘21st Century 
Panglong Peace Conference’ p Photo: Hkun Lat rocess are positive steps towards 
A BOY WAITS IN LINE IN A 
DISPLACEMENT CAMP IN 
KACHIN STATE

16 
PART I: Overview of the SITUATION 
Index. It also ranks 12th out of 191 countries in the Index of 
Risk Management (INFORM), and fourth highest in terms of 
exposure to natural hazards. The country is prone to a range of 
natural hazards including cyclones, storms, floods, landslides, 
earthquakes, tsunamis, drought and forest fires. Historical data 
shows that medium to large-scale natural disasters occur every 
few years. Since 2002, more than 13 million people have been 
affected by natural disasters, including three Category 4 cyclones, 
several major earthquakes, and severe flooding. 
Monsoon seasonal floods triggered by heavy rains in 2018 
affected several states and regions in Myanmar. Since June 
2018, about 268,000 people have been displaced by flooding 
and at least 57 people have died, according to the Government’s 
Department of Disaster Management. While the vast majority of 
those displaced have been able to return home, several thousand 
remain displaced in evacuation sites across Bago, Kayin, Mon, 
Tanintharyi and Magway as of September 2018. The 
Government continues to lead the response, in cooperation with 
state/regional authorities and with the support of national and 
international humanitarian organizations. 
The frequent exposure of an already vulnerable population to 
natural disasters – floods, landslides, droughts and earthquakes 
– underlines the critical importance of building resilience. 
This includes investing more in disaster risk reduction and 
strengthening capacities of local and national organizations 
(government and non-government) to reduce risk, plan for 
and manage disaster response. Women, girls, the elderly and 
persons with disabilities experience increased vulnerability to the 
effects of natural disasters as a consequence of existing systems 
of inequality and discrimination, and are, therefore, often 
disproportionately impacted by disasters including experiencing 
gender-based violence. Disaggregated data from past disasters 
have shown particular high rates of female mortality from 
disasters (e.g. female mortality accounted for 61 per cent from 
Cyclone Nargis in 2008). The elderly are also at heightened 
risk. Accordingly, any disaster risk reduction, preparedness and 
response activities must prioritize the equitable participation 
of all groups, particularly young people, and adopt a genderresponsive 
and inclusive approach. 
KEY ISSUES 
Protection of civilians and durable solutions for 
displaced people 
Access of vulnerable, crisis-affected people to 
assistance, services and livelihoods 
Strengthening the resilience of communities and 
national capacities to prepare for and respond 
to natural disasters and other emergencies 
peace and reconciliation and have led to significant decline in 
violent conflict and increased stability in many parts, many areas 
of south-eastern Myanmar are not under direct government 
control and the presence of the military and other armed groups 
continues to have an impact on peace and development. 
South-eastern Myanmar presents a unique context in Myanmar 
to further the humanitarian-development-peace nexus. This is 
based on an expectation that the socio-political and economic 
situation in the area may improve and further progress will 
be made in facilitating the return and reintegration of those 
displaced by conflict. There is also an expectation of further 
peace-building across different ethnic groups. 
While the overall situation is not yet conducive to the 
promotion of large-scale returns, spontaneous returns have 
been ongoing for several years in south-eastern Myanmar, and 
the option of facilitated return has been available since 2016 
for verified refugees in Thailand. So far, two facilitated return 
exercises of refugees have taken place facilitated by the Royal 
Thai Government and the Government of the Republic of the 
Union of Myanmar, with the support of UNHCR and partners. 
This involved 71 individuals in October 2016 and 93 individuals 
in May 2018. Currently a few hundred refugees have signed up 
to return to Myanmar through the facilitated process and are 
awaiting clearance to repatriate. UNHCR expects returns to 
continue at a slow but steady pace. 
While efforts to achieve a nationwide peace are continuing, 
there remains a risk of further conflict and instability. Sporadic 
clashes occurred in Kayin State in 2016 and 2018, preventing 
any large-scale return of IDP or refugees to their homes and 
displacing some 6,000 persons in Myain Ngi Ngu, 2,300 persons 
in Lel Mu Paw and approximately 2,000 IDPs in Ei Thu Tha, 
Hpapun. These displaced people are being supported by local 
authorities, community members and UN/NGOs. 
The needs of the population in south-eastern Myanmar are 
closely interlinked with peace and state-building agendas and 
include civil documentation, landmine risks, land ownership, 
equal access to public services and livelihoods. Gender-based 
violence remains a major protection concern, with high levels 
of drug use being a key risk factor for violence against women 
and girls in the region. Women continue to have limited 
opportunities to contribute to the ongoing peace-building and 
recovery process to ensure their specific needs are met and 
voices heard. Moving forward, support is needed for a strategy 
that includes facilitating the return and reintegration of refugees 
and IDPs as well as to address the social needs and development 
aspirations of all citizens in the area. 
Natural Disasters 
Myanmar is one of the most disaster-prone countries in Asia. 
It ranks third out of 187 countries in the Global Climate Risk 

17 
PART I: Strate gic Objecti ves 
STRATEGIC 
OBJECTIVES 
The overarching goal of this strategy is to support the Government of the Republic 
of the Union of Myanmar and local communities to ensure that the lives, dignity, 
well-being and rights of persons affected by conflict, natural disasters and other 
emergencies are protected. To achieve this goal, the Humanitarian Country Team has 
agreed on the following strategic objectives for humanitarian action in 2019: 
1 Promote respect for human rights, ensure protection 
of civilians, and support durable solutions for internally 
displaced people and other crisis-affected populations 
Support efforts to ensure that displaced people and crisis-affected women, 
girls, boys and men are able to live in safety and with dignity; actively 
engage the Government, local authorities and affected communities in 
achieving durable solutions; contribute to the protection of civilians from 
violence and abuse by reducing exposure to harm, mitigating its negative 
impact and responding to serious protection needs; and advocate for 
full respect for the rights of individuals in accordance with international 
humanitarian and human rights laws 
2 Ensure that vulnerable, crisis-affected people have 
access to assistance, services and livelihoods opportunities 
Support efforts to ensure that vulnerable people (both displaced and 
non-displaced whose lives are affected by factors such as armed conflict, 
inter-communal tensions, movement restrictions and restrictive policies 
or practices) have equitable access to essential services and livelihoods 
opportunities 
3Contribute to strengthening the resilience of communities 
and building national capacities to prepare 
for and respond to natural disasters and other 
emergencies 
Support efforts to strengthen national capacities to prepare for and 
respond to natural disasters and other emergencies and to enhance the 
resilience of communities; support efforts to promote early recovery 

18 
PART I: Response strate gy 
RESPONSE 
STRATEGY 
The Humanitarian Country Team is committed to a “new way of working” that meets 
people’s immediate humanitarian needs while at the same time reducing risk and 
vulnerability in the longer-term. This requires close cooperation between humanitarian 
and development partners, while at the same time ensuring respect for their 
respective operating principles. Mitigating crisis risks and reducing vulnerability is as 
much a humanitarian imperative as it is a development necessity to ensure progress 
towards achieving the Sustainable Development Goals for all those affected by 
humanitarian crises today. The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development outlines 
a global commitment to leaving no-one behind. It specifically references people 
affected by humanitarian emergencies and creates a common results framework 
under which both humanitarian and development actors can work together to ensure 
the most vulnerable are afforded safety, dignity and the ability to thrive. The Country 
Team also remains committed to implementing “Agenda for Humanity” in line with the 
outcomes of the 2016 World Humanitarian Summit. 
Scope and priorities 
The Humanitarian Response Plan focuses primarily on Kachin, 
Shan, Rakhine and Kayin states, which have the most urgent 
humanitarian needs stemming from conflict, movement 
restrictions and discriminatory policies/practices. The 
Humanitarian Country Team in Myanmar has focused the plan 
to prioritize the most critical needs of approximately 941,000 
people. Children make up about 49 per cent of this population, 
while women and children together make up about 76 per cent. 
This prioritization is based on a number of factors including 
requests for support from the Government, consultations with 
affected people, response capacities of the Government and 
national institutions, access constraints, as well as the capacities 
of other key actors to contribute to the humanitarian response. 
The Humanitarian Country Team recognizes that humanitarian 
action is a critical component of a broader, long term 
engagement that is needed to address the wide range of 
humanitarian, development, human rights and peace-building 
challenges. To this end, this Humanitarian Response Plan is 
aligned with other relevant documents and strategies, such 
as the Final Report and Recommendations of the Advisory 
Commission in Rakhine State (August 2017) and the Strategic 
Framework for International Engagement in Rakhine (April 
2018). The aim is to support the Government of the Republic 
of the Union of Myanmar to address protection risks and 
reduce humanitarian needs and vulnerabilities. The focus is on 
strengthening the resilience of communities and supporting 
joint efforts to address the drivers of vulnerabilities and 
underlying structural issues in partnership with development 
and peacebuilding partners. 
The plan prioritizes the provision of life-saving support for the 
most vulnerable crisis-affected women, men, boys and girls and 
programmes to ensure equitable access to essential services, 
without discrimination of any kind, including on grounds of 
sex, gender, ethnicity, religion, abilities, ages or other factors. 
The plan also focuses on achieving durable solutions to internal 
displacement in line with international protection standards. 
It takes account of broader, longer-term development needs 
of communities to increase their resilience to potential future 
shocks and seeks to ensure that humanitarian action links up 
effectively with wider development efforts. The plan also aims 
to build national capacity to prepare for and respond to natural 
disasters and other emergencies. In all aspects of its work, the 
Humanitarian Country Team is committed to ensuring that 
humanitarian action in Myanmar is carried out in accordance 
with humanitarian principles of humanity, neutrality and 
impartiality. 
In the case of the northern part of Rakhine State, UNHCR and 
UNDP signed a tripartite Memorandum of Understanding 
(MoU) in June 2018 with the Government of the Republic of 
the Union of Myanmar to support the Government’s efforts 
to find comprehensive and durable solutions to the crisis 
in Rakhine State and create conducive conditions for the 
voluntary, safe, dignified and sustainable return of refugees to 
their places of origin or choice in Rakhine State. Currently, the 
UN does not consider that appropriate conditions are in place 

19 
PART I: Response strate gy 
in the northern part of Rakhine State for return. This MoU is a 
first and necessary step to change that situation by improving 
the conditions of those remaining, fostering social cohesion 
and strengthening recovery and resilience-based development 
for the benefit of all communities living in Rakhine State. 
In line with the MoU, root causes need to be addressed by 
implementing the recommendations of the Rakhine Advisory 
Commission as endorsed by the Government, including those 
related to freedom of movement and a clear, voluntary and 
equal pathway to citizenship for all eligible individuals. 
In terms of overall coordination in Rakhine, the Rakhine 
Coordination Group (chaired by the UN Senior Advisor) 
serves as an all-of-Rakhine forum, providing coordination 
and information-sharing pertaining to all areas of the state, 
and aims to be an integrated coordination forum, across the 
humanitarian, human rights, development, and peacebuilding 
efforts in Rakhine State, allowing UN agencies, INGOs and 
other development partners to follow individual mandates 
while strengthening inter-group coordination for a ‘whole of 
Rakhine’ approach. The coordination of humanitarian action in 
Rakhine State includes area-based coordination bodies, i.e. the 
Maungdaw Inter Agency Group (MIAG) and the Sittwe-based 
Inter-Cluster Coordination Group (ICCG) supported by other 
technical working groups under the strategic leadership of the 
Humanitarian Country Team and the Rakhine Coordination 
Group. These area-based coordination bodies will operate 
in full respect of the mandated roles and responsibilities of 
all partners, including UNHCR’s responsibility in relation to 
States’ compliance with their international obligations toward 
refugees and stateless persons, enabling complementarity 
and collaborative actions based on operational capacity and 
resources. 
In the case of south-eastern Myanmar, where much of the 
displacement occurred decades ago, humanitarian needs 
are closely inter-linked with the on-going peace process and 
longer-term development needs. Addressing the needs of 
people in the south-east is therefore considered to be beyond 
the scope of this Humanitarian Response Plan. However, 
subject to requests from the Government, the Humanitarian 
Country Team may respond to urgent humanitarian needs 
resulting from new or recent fighting and displacement in the 
south-east, just as in any other part of the country. 
Promoting respect for international humanitarian and 
human rights law and for humanitarian principles 
The World Humanitarian Summit reaffirmed respect for 
international humanitarian and human rights law as the best 
way to save lives, reduce suffering and protect civilians in 
situations of conflict and insecurity. Furthermore, the Summit 
noted that far more needs to be done to improve compliance 
and accountability for violations of international law. 
Cognizant of the findings and recommendations of various 
international human rights mechanisms regarding the situation 
in Myanmar, the Humanitarian Country Team recognizes 
the importance of ensuring respect for international law. This 
includes promoting and protecting human rights, ensuring 
accountability of perpetrators for violations of human rights 
regardless of official position, and providing redress to victims, 
including through restitution, compensation, rehabilitation, 
satisfaction and guarantees of non-repetition. Specifically in 
relation to humanitarian action, this includes expanding the 
understanding of international humanitarian and human rights 
law; working to protect civilians from the effects of hostilities; 
supporting the Government to prevent, monitor, report on and 
respond to grave violations against children and gender-based 
violence; assisting in providing essential services in conflict 
areas; and assisting in identifying and addressing violations and 
abuses where they occur. 
The United Nations ‘Human Rights Up Front’ Plan of Action 
emphasizes the imperative for the United Nations to protect 
people, wherever they may be, in accordance with their 
human rights and in a manner that prevents and responds to 
violations of international human rights and humanitarian 
law by all parties. As stated by the Inter-Agency Standing 
Committee (IASC) Principals, “this same imperative to protect 
people lies also at the heart of humanitarian action”. The Plan 
of Action calls for a continuing assessment of the risks and 
threats to populations alongside a human rights analysis in 
defining actions to be taken by relevant UN entities at the 
national, regional and global levels to achieve identified priority 
objectives. 
The Humanitarian Country Team will continue to advocate 
for affected people to have access to humanitarian assistance 
and protection services in situations of armed conflict, with 
particular attention to the vulnerability of women, children, 
people with a disability and the elderly. The Country Team 
will also reinforce its advocacy efforts for increased access 
by humanitarian actors to people in conflict-affected areas. 
This will be done through continued close engagement 
with Government authorities and other key stakeholders 
in both Government-controlled and non-Governmentcontrolled 
areas. It will also include consistent engagement 
with community-based organizations, local communities and 
affected people, to ensure full transparency and accountability 
of all humanitarian operations. 
The Humanitarian Country Team will continue its joint 
advocacy efforts on behalf of crisis-affected people in 
Myanmar. It will continue to collect and analyse information, 
to support evidence-based advocacy, using a rightsbased 
approach. With the support of the humanitarian 
sectors/clusters and of its Humanitarian Advocacy and 
PRIORITIZATION CRITERIA 
Life-saving Vulnerability 
Time critical Geography

20 
PART I: Response strate gy 
Communications Group, the Humanitarian Country Team 
will engage with Government authorities, civil society 
organizations, member states, the media and other key 
stakeholders in coordinated advocacy in support of strategic 
objectives outlined in this Humanitarian Response Plan. 
Ensuring the centrality of protection 
In line with the Statement on the Centrality of Protection in 
Humanitarian Action, endorsed by the Inter-Agency Standing 
Committee (IASC) Principals in 2013, the Humanitarian 
Country Team remains fully committed to placing people at 
the centre of its work, with a strong focus on vulnerable and 
marginalized groups, including female-headed households, 
older persons, children and persons with disabilities. This will 
be achieved through, inter alia, all clusters/sectors partners’ 
continued commitment to mainstream protection throughout 
their programmes. The newly adopted Humanitarian 
Country Team’s protection strategy provides a framework 
for addressing the most urgent and serious protection risks, 
as well as for preventing the recurrence of violations of 
international human rights and humanitarian law. 
Ensuring gender equality in humanitarian action 
The Humanitarian Country Team will implement the new IASC 
Policy for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women 
and Girls, as well as overall IASC gender in humanitarian action 
guidance. This includes particular focus on joint analysis of 
needs, experiences and perspectives of women and girls, as well 
as men and boys of different ages, abilities, gender identities, 
sexual orientations, ethnicities, religions and other diversities 
are identified and integrated into the humanitarian programme 
cycle. The Humanitarian Country Team will ensure the use of 
gender mainstreaming and targeted action for gender equality 
and empowerment of women and girls in preparedness, 
response, recovery and resilience building. In addition, the 
Humanitarian Country Team will promote women’s leadership, 
meaningful participation and equal representation in 
humanitarian planning and response, as well as in longer-term 
peace and development processes, including through gender 
transformative approaches. Engagement of women’s CSOs and 
other key partners will be critical to promote gender equality 
and women’s empowerment. The Humanitarian Country Team 
will promote financial provisions to fully resource programming 
gender equality and empowerment of women and girls. 
The Humanitarian Country Team commits to sustained 
collection, analysis and use of sex and age disaggregated 
data to inform interventions which aim to ensure women 
have equal and safe access to relief, information, cash 
programmes, sustainable livelihoods, training opportunities, 
which will be key components of the humanitarian response. 
The Humanitarian Country Team will also support 
women’s economic empowerment through livelihoods 
and employment interventions which are accessible 
and minimize risk to women and girls. Importantly, the 
Humanitarian Country Team will also promote working 
with men and boys to achieve gender equality and the 
empowerment of women and girls in humanitarian action, 
and to address the prevalence of gender-based violence, as 
well as promoting positive masculinities. Universal access 
to sexual and reproductive health services regardless of 
ethnicity and religious affiliation is essential in ensuring 
that the humanitarian response is both people-centred and 
A GIRL DISPLACED BY THE CONFLICT 
IN TANAI, KACHIN STATE 
Photo: OCHA/H.H. Oo

21 
PART I: Response strate gy 
gender-inclusive. It is also critical to address the specific needs 
and to harness the energy and capacities of young people in 
emergency preparedness and humanitarian response. 
The Humanitarian Country Team is also committed to 
strengthening inclusion in the humanitarian programming 
cycle. This includes strengthening interventions supporting 
the needs and rights of crisis-affected people with disabilities, 
including displaced people. In addition to this, the 
Humanitarian Country Team will also focus on better 
addressing the needs, rights and protection concerns, 
including gender-based violence, of the lesbian, gay, 
bisexual, transgender, intersex (LGBTI) community during 
emergencies. Strengthening engagement with and support 
for disability and LGBTI rights organisations will be key to 
ensuring an accountable, transformative and rights-based 
approach based on the priorities and informed choices of 
affected communities, including women and girls. 
Protecting people from sexual exploitation and abuse 
The Humanitarian Country Team is committed to creating 
an operating environment in which there is zero tolerance 
for any form of sexual harassment, exploitation and abuse, 
of staff, or affected populations. In particular, the 
Humanitarian Country Team commits to putting in place 
measures to prevent and respond to sexual exploitation and 
abuse by humanitarian personnel against affected women, 
girls, boys and men. Recognising the power disparities 
between those who provide aid and those in need of 
assistance, the Humanitarian Country Team commits to 
strengthen awareness raising with affected populations 
regarding their rights and where to report and seek support; 
training of staff to know their roles and responsibilities; 
develop and promote guidelines, including for interagency 
reporting on sexual exploitation and abuse cases, victim/ 
survivor support and protection, and support coordination 
of interagency approaches, including effectively supporting 
the Prevention on Sexual Exploitation and Abuse Focal 
Points Network. 
Preventing and responding to gender-based violence 
The Humanitarian Country Team recognizes the importance 
of preventing and responding to gender-based violence. The 
Humanitarian Country Team also recognizes the responsibility 
of all humanitarian actors to implement gender-based violence 
mitigation and prevention measures and the rights of all 
survivors to access quality multi-sectoral services – including 
legal, health and psychosocial services. The Humanitarian 
Country Team commits to continue engaging with all 
stakeholders at both the union and state levels to strengthen 
accountability and capacities to prevent and respond to all 
forms of gender-based violence, including sexual violence. 
Ensuring a conflict-sensitive approach 
The Humanitarian Country Team recognizes the importance 
of the ongoing peace process in Myanmar and of initiatives 
aimed at promoting reconciliation, respect for diversity and 
social cohesion. It further recognizes that while humanitarian 
action may be needed to save lives and reduce human suffering 
in times of conflict, humanitarian action deals primarily with 
the consequences of conflict. Priority must be given to ending 
existing conflicts and preventing new ones from arising. In 
this regard, while advocating for full respect for humanitarian 
principles, the Humanitarian Country Team is committed to 
ensuring appropriate linkages with those working on peacebuilding 
and development initiatives. It will strive to adopt a 
conflict-sensitive, ‘Do No Harm’ approach to all its work. 
Seeking durable solutions for displaced people 
In all its work, the Humanitarian Country Team will continue 
to prioritize the search for durable solutions for internally 
displaced people which are in line with international 
protection standards. The Country Team will continue 
engaging the Government at both Union and State levels, in 
close collaboration with other key stakeholders. Whenever 
and wherever feasible and appropriate, the Country Team 
will support sustainable and dignified returns, as well as local 
integration or resettlement opportunities that are based on an 
individual and informed choice, and that are voluntary and safe. 
Ensuring privacy for affected people 
The provision of humanitarian assistance must take account 
of the particular needs of women, girls and other persons 
with special needs. While this takes many forms, it is essential 
that all programme responses must ensure privacy. The 
impact of the provision of privacy is twofold. Firstly, privacy 
in homes will ensure that couples can continue to maintain 
intimacy in a dignified manner. Secondly, this privacy serves 
as a foundation, which women are provided with space to 
advocate for an increased role within family decision-making, 
as well as a space for couples and families to preserve their 
dignity and integrity, especially in their relationships. Privacy 
can also serve to mitigate the risk of gender-based violence for 
women and girls, and in particular adolescent girls. 
Ensuring accountability to affected people and their 
meaningful participation in planning and decisionmaking 
Being accountable to people affected by crises remains a 
priority of the Humanitarian Country Team. Face-to-face 
interaction has often been highlighted by communities as 
their preferred means of providing feedback to agencies. 
Humanitarian actors are exploring optimal ways of 
communicating with affected people to ensure high 
quality, principled and accountable humanitarian action. 
While efforts have been made to strengthen channels 
of communication with communities at all stages of the 
programme cycle, in 2019 stronger emphasis will be placed 
on timely follow-up and feedback to communities and 

22 
PART I: Response strate gy 
individuals. As part of the 2019 planning process, some 
focus group discussions took place in several displacement 
camps to have a better understanding of the priority needs 
and types of assistance preferred by different segments of the 
population, especially the most vulnerable. The Inter-Cluster 
Coordination Group has committed to enhance these efforts 
in 2019. Towards achieving the Strategic Objectives outlined 
in the 2019 Humanitarian Response Plan, the Humanitarian 
Country Team will promote accountability to affected 
people through the following actions: (1) strong advocacy 
on the need for proper consultations with displaced people 
before, during and after return and relocation processes; (2) 
continue ongoing efforts to enhance affected communities’ 
participation in planning and periodic monitoring processes; 
(3) strengthen mechanisms for preventing, and protecting 
affected people from, sexual exploitation and abuse and 
(4) build on existing mechanisms for communicating with 
communities as part of interagency disaster preparedness, to 
ensure an effective coordinated response to new emergencies. 
Strengthening community resilience and localization 
efforts 
To reduce dependency on international humanitarian assistance 
and to enhance the resilience of communities, the Humanitarian 
Country Team will work closely with communities, national 
and local authorities, and development partners to increase 
access to livelihoods and basic services. It is recognized that 
there is a need to strengthen capacities of communities and of 
Community-Based Organizations, as they are usually the first 
responders in crises. A risk-sensitive approach will be applied to 
reduce vulnerability by investing in sustainable self-sufficiency 
of households and communities and supporting stable income 
generation by increasing access to livelihood opportunities. 
Strengthening the resilience of communities is a long-term 
objective and will continue to require a comprehensive, multisectoral 
and coordinated approach. 
The World Humanitarian Summit called for humanitarian 
preparedness and response efforts to be “as local as 
possible” and “as international as necessary”. The need to 
support a localized response in Myanmar is an objective 
that the Humanitarian Country Team is already working 
towards. More work will be done in this respect to enhance 
the capacity of national and local organizations through 
coaching and on-the-job training in the areas of international 
humanitarian and human rights law, humanitarian 
principals, gender-responsive programming, gender equality, 
administration, finance, needs assessment and monitoring etc. 
The Humanitarian Country Team is committed to facilitate 
local partners’ access to humanitarian funding, particularly 
through the Myanmar Humanitarian Fund. This countrybased 
pooled fund is a flexible, efficient and responsive 
funding mechanism. It aims to ensure that at least 50 per 
cent of its funds are channelled through national and local 
NGOs, in recognition of the critical role they play in service 
delivery and to strengthen their response capacity. This will 
be supported by the investment in developing the capacity 
of local organizations to manage funding in an accountable 
and transparent manner. The Humanitarian Country Team 
will continue to support the transition, where appropriate, of 
international organizations from having a “delivery” role to 
having a more advisory/enabling role in support of national 
and local humanitarian actors. Stronger engagement with 
local and civil society networks is critical to these efforts and 
support will be extended in particular to networks promoting 
the empowerment of women and young people. 
Enhancing emergency response preparedness 
To improve disaster preparedness, mitigation and response 
capacities, the Humanitarian Country Team will increase 
engagement with relevant ministries at the Union level and 
particularly with the Emergency Operations Centre in the 
Department of Disaster Management (Ministry of Social 
Welfare, Relief and Resettlement). It will also engage with 
authorities at the State and Township levels where appropriate. 
In the case of Rakhine, the Country Team will engage closely 
with the Government’s Committee for Implementation of 
the Recommendations on Rakhine State and also with the 
Government’s Union Enterprise for Humanitarian Assistance, 
Resettlement and Development in Rakhine. 
The Humanitarian Country Team recognizes that people in 
Myanmar face repeated shocks from recurrent disasters, leaving 
them more vulnerable with each new event and often even more 
dependent on assistance. It is critical for the Country Team 
to support the Government to anticipate and respond in an 
appropriate and expedient manner to risks in order to reduce 
their impact. The Country Team will work to maintain national 
preparedness strategies, based on credible data, to identify 
populations at risk and to invest in strengthening their resilience. 
The Country Team will also work closely with the Government 
and local authorities to strengthen early warning systems. It will 
continue to promote joint simulation exercises with national 
actors for disaster response. It will also ensure that its activities 
are aligned with the National Strategic Plan for the Advancement 
of Women (2013 – 2022) which specifically highlights actions to 
support the resilience of women and girls in emergencies. 
The Country Team embraces both civil society and the 
private sector as strategic partners in delivering humanitarian 
outcomes. The Humanitarian Country Team is committed 
to making the private sector an integral part of all disaster 
response and recovery planning and will pursue innovative 
private partnerships, particularly around the delivery of cash 
assistance and development of new technology to improve 
the effectiveness of humanitarian response. It will continue to 
support the newly established private sector network for disaster 
preparedness and response. 
The Country Team will also consider further ways to support 
the Government’s response mechanisms. This includes 
support for strengthening humanitarian civil-military 
coordination for responding to natural disasters and other 

23 
PART I: Response strate gy 
emergencies through enhanced dialogue and interaction. 
Enhanced coordination between civilian and military actors 
is essential for protecting and promoting humanitarian 
principles, avoiding competition, minimizing inconsistency 
and, when appropriate, pursing common goals. In parallel, 
it will continue to support the Government in strengthening 
and complementing its social protection system, which will 
also contribute to increased resilience. 
The Country Team will maintain and regularly update its own 
Emergency Preparedness Response Plan and contingency 
plans to support the Government in responding to natural 
disasters and other emergencies. In view of the evolving 
situations in Kachin, Shan and Rakhine, the Country Team 
has been reviewing its contingency plans for these states. In 
the case of northern Rakhine, while there has been some 
slight improvement in access for some humanitarian staff 
recently, it remains severely restricted for the United Nations 
and humanitarian partners. In this regard, the Country Team’s 
response plan may be further revised once comprehensive needs 
assessments are conducted in the relevant areas and subject to 
requests from the Government. Similarly, if new humanitarian 
needs arise in other parts of the country, and subject to requests 
for assistance from the Government and approval of access, the 
Country Team’s response plan will be updated accordingly. 
Enhancing the use of cash transfer programming 
In line with the Grand Bargain goals, the Humanitarian 
Country Team, the Government and other partners recognize 
the enormous potential of cash-based assistance during 
crisis. In 2018 alone, more than 200,000 crises-affected 
people were to be reached with humanitarian cash transfers 
valued at about US$8 million, and in 2019 cash programmes 
will continue to increase the flexibility of humanitarian 
responses through manual or digital payments. Although key 
operational constraints related to security concerns and limited 
mobile network coverage remain, local contexts are evolving 
quickly and the expansion of financial services will support 
the scale up of e-cash programmes. In September 2018, an 
interagency cash feasibility update was initiated to provide 
updated information on potential risks of implementing 
cash-based assistance in the Sittwe area and identify possible 
mitigation measures collectively and feasibility updates will 
continue to inform decisions about the most appropriate 
response options. Humanitarian actors will also continue to 
explore the possibility of piloting more joint multi-purpose 
cash programmes. This builds on successful pilots such as a 
joint cash programme involving unconditional unrestricted 
cash transfers implemented by UNICEF and WFP to address 
food and WASH needs in the aftermath of floods in Southeastern 
Myanmar in 2018. Acknowledging the importance of 
local contexts, cash working groups at sub-national level will 
continue to help streamline operational standards and technical 
guidelines for cash programming, facilitate information sharing 
among key actors and promote the humanitarian-development 
nexus. Other priorities will be to draw lessons from the rollout 
of the Government’s Maternal and Child Cash Transfer 
programme in Rakhine State as well as to strengthen linkages 
with the Social Protection actors to contribute to national 
social protection systems and the Government’s engagement in 
creating a shock-responsive social protection system. 
MANY CIVILIANS IN SHAN STATE HAVE BE REPEATEDLY 
DISPLACED AND RE-DISPLACED, LIKE THIS FAMILY IN 
MONG YU LAY CAMP 
Photo: OCHA/P. Peron

24 
PART I: Operati onal capacity 
OPERATIONAL 
CAPACITY 
# OF HUMANITARIAN PARTNERS 62 # people in need by township 
Kachin 
Shan (North) 
Rakhine
Chin 
Ayeyarwady 
Sagaing 
Magway 
Bago 
Mandalay 
NPT 
Shan (East) 
Shan (South) 
42 partners 
27 partners 
> 50,000 
10,000 - 50,000 
1 - 10,000 
People in need by township 
26 partners 
National and local capacity 
The Government is the primary duty bearer in the provision 
of protection and assistance to people in Myanmar. It has the 
capacity to assess and respond to a wide variety of humanitarian 
needs across the country in collaboration with its ministries at 
both the Union and state/region level as well as with the General 
Administration Department at different levels. Humanitarian 
partners will continue to support Government-led efforts to 
effectively address the needs of crisis-affected people. 
For Rakhine, there are three Government committees of 
particular relevance for humanitarian and development actors: 
first, the Central Committee for the Implementation of Peace, 
Stability and Development in Rakhine, chaired by the State 
Counsellor; second, the Implementation Committee on the 
recommendations of the Advisory Commission on Rakhine, 
chaired by the Union Minister for Social Welfare, Relief and 
Resettlement and co-chaired by the Chief Minister of Rakhine 
State; and third, the Union Enterprise for Humanitarian 
Assistance, Resettlement and Development in Rakhine, chaired 
by the State Counsellor. 
In Kachin and Shan, while the Government remains the 
primary duty bearer, in areas affected by armed conflict and in 
areas beyond Government control, non-State actors are 
accountable under international law for ensuring the protection 
and well-being of civilians in areas under their effective control. 
National organizations and local civil society also have a big 
role to play. The Joint Strategic Team (JST), comprised of nine 
local NGOs, continues to provide the bulk of the humanitarian 
response, especially in conflict-affected areas in Kachin 
State. It has developed a joint strategy for the humanitarian 
response in Kachin and northern Shan states as well as a 
joint programming strategy for the safe and dignified return 
and relocation of IDPs. The JST is financially and technically 
supported by a number of UN and international humanitarian 
partners. Local women’s organisations are also important actors 
in the humanitarian response in Kachin and Shan states. 
For natural disasters, the Government established the 
Emergency Operations Centre under the Ministry of 
Social Welfare, Relief and Resettlement to support early 
warning and response in coordination with national and 
international partners. A private sector network for disaster 
preparedness and response has also been formed with the aim 
of strengthening private sector engagement and coordinated 
humanitarian action before, during and after emergencies. 
As of August 2018, humanitarian activities of 18 national 
NGOs are being recorded in the 3Ws (Who, What, 
Where) database managed by the Myanmar Information 
Management Unit (MIMU). National NGOs are represented 
in the Humanitarian Country Team by the following four 
organizations/consortia: the Myanmar Red Cross Society; the 
Local Resource Centre; Metta Development Foundation and 
Karuna Myanmar Social Services (KMSS). 
International capacity and response 
In 2018, 32 international non-governmental organizations 
(INGOs) and eight United Nations organizations reported 
humanitarian activities through the MIMU 3Ws database. 
The map below shows the number of humanitarian partners 
present in Kachin, Shan and Rakhine states. 
4 partners

25 
PART I: HUMANITARIAN ACCESS 
# people in need by township 
Kachin 
Shan (North) 
Rakhine
Chin 
Ayeyarwady 
Sagaing 
Magway 
Bago 
Mandalay 
NPT 
Shan (East) 
Shan (South) 
HUMANITARIAN 
ACCESS 
Independent and impartial humanitarian organizations have varying levels of access to 
vulnerable crisis-affected people in Kachin, Shan and Rakhine states. Access is determined 
by the authorities at Union and State levels. In some areas, humanitarian organizations 
face significant access constraints, resulting in difficulties and delays in implementing and 
monitoring humanitarian activities. Many displaced people and other vulnerable conflictaffected 
people do not have safe and sustained access to humanitarian support as a result 
of movement restrictions and/or security concerns. Humanitarian activities are sometimes 
cancelled or delayed due to lengthy approval processes and non-issuance of travel 
authorizations. The United Nations continues to call for safe and 
unhindered humanitarian access to vulnerable crisis-affected 
people wherever they are, in both Government areas and non- 
Government-controlled areas. 
Rakhine State 
In Rakhine State, the main challenge is that severe movement 
restrictions on Muslim communities (including IDPs) are affecting 
their access to healthcare, education and livelihoods opportunities. 
Humanitarian organizations in Rakhine continue to face access 
constraints. In northern Rakhine, humanitarian access has been 
severely constrained since 25 August 2017, with a considerable 
number of humanitarian partners (50 per cent) unable to access 
affected areas, challenging the provision of critical relief assistance 
and protection services to all communities in need. Among 
organizations that have been authorized to access field sites, obstacles 
remain including time-bound authorizations, geographic limitations, 
restrictions on the types of activities carried out, and bureaucratic 
administrative procedures. The unpredictable nature of the granting 
of access continues to have implications for organizations’ ability 
to scale-up activities at short notice as well as retain qualified staff 
and local capacity building efforts. The final report of the Advisory 
Commission on Rakhine State recommends the following: “The 
Government of Myanmar should ensure full and unimpeded 
humanitarian access – for both national and international staff – at 
all times and to all communities in Rakhine State”. 
Kachin and Shan states 
In Kachin and Shan states, humanitarian access to vulnerable people 
in Government-controlled areas has declined over the last three years, 
with most permissions for international staff only granted to main 
towns. The United Nations has not been permitted by the Government 
to deliver assistance to people in need in areas beyond Government 
control since June 2016. While national partners continue to have 
some limited and unpredictable access to areas beyond Government 
control, the UN and nearly all international NGOs cannot monitor 
or support them in their activities. Humanitarian access constraints 
continue to undermine the quantity, quality and sustainability of 
assistance and services provided to IDPs, further exhausting their 
coping mechanisms after seven years of displacement.

26 
PART I: Response Monitoring 
RESPONSE 
MONITORING 
The Humanitarian Country Team has agreed on targets and indicators for each of the sectors/ 
clusters within the scope of this humanitarian response plan. These are used as the basis 
for overall monitoring of humanitarian response, thereby improving analysis, planning and 
decision making. The Inter-Cluster Coordination Group takes the lead in ensuring regular 
monitoring and reporting of response implementation status and challenges. During the 
year, the Humanitarian Country Team will produce bi-annual monitoring reports, detailing 
each sector/cluster’s achievements, challenges, and recommendations for follow-up action. 
In addition to the Humanitarian Country Team monitoring 
reports, individual sectors/clusters or agencies produce a 
range of monitoring reports throughout the year, and reports 
on multi-sector inter-agency assessment missions are shared 
with the Humanitarian Country Team. Publicly available 
monitoring reports are subsequently posted on the website 
of the Myanmar Information Management Unit (MIMU). 
OCHA also publishes Humanitarian Snapshots and Funding 
Updates on a regular basis. 
The MIMU conducts a countrywide, comprehensive 3W 
(Who is doing What, Where) every six months. This gathers 
information on humanitarian and development activities 
to the village level across 154 sub-sectors with 238 agencies 
(international and national NGOs, UN and Red Cross 
agencies) contributing information on their activities. The 
Information Management Network has developed the 
Humanitarian Data Standards with clusters and sectors 
working in Rakhine, Kachin and Shan to promote more 
efficient use of information gathered by field-based agencies. 
The following actions will be prioritised for 2019: 
• Advocate for comprehensive multi-sector needs assessments 
in Kachin, Shan and Rakhine states; 
• Produce bi-annual monitoring reports; 
• Strengthen the data collection and analysis on the situation 
of men, women, girls and boys who are in situations of 
disability, in particular victims of landmines or explosive 
remnants of war; 
• Critically review monitoring results by the ICCG and HCT, 
to inform activities aimed at addressing obstacles to effective 
delivery of humanitarian assistance; 
• Collect and analyse sex and age disaggregated data (SADD) 
across all clusters/sectors and strengthen protection and 
gender analysis; 
• Use reliable and regularly updated data to feed into 
information products and to inform decision making. 
HUMANITARIAN REPORTING TIMELINE 
Hum snapshot of IDPs 
Monitoring Report 
Humanitarian Needs Overview 
Humanitarian Response Plan 
JAN FEB MAR APR MAY JUN JUL AUG SEP OCT NOV DEC JAN 
2019 2020

27 
PART I: Summary of needs, tar gets & requirements 
SUMMARY OF 
NEEDS, TARGETS & 
REQUIREMENTS 
The Humanitarian Country Team estimates that US$ 202.2 million will be required in 2019 
to address the humanitarian protection and assistance needs of some 941,300 people as 
indicated below: 
PEOPLE IN NEED 
941,300 
Kachin: 168,000 
Shan: 48,000 
Rakhine: 715,000 
Kayin: 10,300 
PEOPLE TARGETED 
941,300 Kachin: 168,000 
Shan: 48,000 
Rakhine: 715,000 
Kayin: 10,300 
REQUIREMENTS (US$) 
202.2M 
Kachin: 43 M 
Shan: 12.9 M 
Rakhine: 145.5 M 
Kayin: 0.8 M 
SECTOR 
TOTAL BREAKDOWN OF PEOPLE TARGETED 
FUNDING 
NEEDS 
PEOPLE (US$) 
IN NEED 
PEOPLE 
TARGETED 
Internally 
displaced 
persons 
IDP 
returnees/ 
resettled/ 
locally 
integrated 
Nondisplaced 
stateless 
people in 
Rakhine 
Other 
vulnerable 
crisisaffected 
people 
BY SEX BY AGE 
% 
Female 
% 
Children 
% 
Adult 
% 
Elderly 
EDUCATION 278,200 135,598 69,191 2,470 47,762 16,175 55 97.4 2.6 - 17M 
FOOD 
SECURITY 823,587 623,200 221,800 12,000 258,000 131,400 51 49 46 5 56.8M 
HEALTH 941,351 931,051 234,183 12,475 470,000 214,393 55 30 65 5 32.6M 
NUTRITION 181,271 138,346 39,966 934 72,380 25,066 52 70 30 - 10.5M 
PROTECTION 931,050 838,166 234,183 12,475 470,000 121,508 51 49 46 5 31.7M 
CCCM/ 
SHELTER/ NFIS 266,658 247,956 229,956 - - 18,000 52 48 46 6 22.4M 
WASH 915,603 487,648 203,446 100 195,348 88,754 51 49 46 5 27.2M 
COORDINATION 
& COMMON 
SERVICES 
- - - - - - - - - - 4.0M 
TOTAL 202.2M

28 
PART I: Summary of needs, tar gets & requirements 
CONTACT DETAILS OF FOCAL POINTS 
NATIONAL-LEVEL CLUSTER/SECTOR COORDINATORS 
SECTOR/CLUSTER NAME EMAIL 
Education in Emergencies Sector Elisa Radisone elisa.radisone@savethechildren.org 
Food Security Sector Andrea Berloffa 
Soi Lang Seng 
andrea.berloffa@fao.org 
soilang.seng@wfp.org 
Health Cluster Win Bo bow@who.int 
Nutrition Sector Jecinter Oketch jaoketch@unicef.org 
Protection Sector 
Child Protection (CP) Sub-Sector 
Gender-based violence (GBV) Sub-Sector 
Geraldine Salducci Petruccelli 
Cecile Marchand (CP) 
Miriam Ciscar (GBV) 
salducci@unhcr.org 
cmarchand@unicef.org 
ciscarblat@unfpa.org 
Shelter/Non-food-items/Camp Coordination and Camp 
Management Cluster Geraldine Salducci Petruccelli salducci@unhcr.org 
Water, Sanitation and Hygiene Cluster Sunny Guidotti sguidotti@unicef.org 
Multi-sectoral response for northern Rakhine (MIAG) Gwenolenn Le Couster lecouste@unhcr.org 
AREA-BASED COORDINATION MECHANISMS 
REGION MECHANISM NAME EMAIL 
Rakhine State Rakhine Coordination Group (RCG) Andreas Indregard andreas.indregard@one.un.org 
Rakhine State (northern Rakhine) Maungdaw Inter-Agency Group (MIAG) Fumiko Kashiwa kashiwaf@unhcr.org 
Central Rakhine Sittwe-based Inter-Cluster Coordination 
Group (Sittwe ICCG) Gloria Lazic lazic@un.org 
Kachin State – AHCT 
Northern Shan – GCM 
Area Humanitarian Country Team (AHCT), 
Kachin State & Lashio-based General 
Coordination Meeting (GCM) 
Cecil Dunne dunnec@un.org

29 
PART I: Summary of needs, tar gets & requirements 
PART II: OPERATIONAL 
RESPONSE PLANS 
Education 
Food Security 
Health 
Nutrition 
Protection 
Shelter/Non-food items/Camp Coordination and Camp Management 
Water, Sanitation & Hygiene 
Coordination and Common Services

30 
PART II: EDUCATION 
EDUCATION PEOPLE IN NEED 
278,200 
Kachin: 53,100 
Shan: 11,700 
Rakhine: 210,000 
Kayin: 3,400 
REQUIREMENTS (US$) 
17M 
Kachin: 4.2 M 
Shan: 1.1 M 
Rakhine: 11.6 M 
Kayin: 0.1 M 
PEOPLE TARGETED 
135,598 
Kachin: 43,226 
Shan: 6,003 
Rakhine: 82,969 
Kayin: 3,400 
# OF PARTNERS 
12 
The Education in Emergencies (EiE) sector will 
continue supporting access to quality and protective 
learning opportunities to children affected by crisis. 
This will be complemented by an increased focus on 
strengthening the Humanitarian Development Nexus, 
through linking the EiE sector interventions with the 
National Education Strategic Plan and strengthening 
engagement with the Ministry of Education (MoE) 
at all levels to jointly explore solutions that can offer 
sustainable, equitable and inclusive access to education 
opportunities to children affected by crisis. The 
engagement with MoE will also focus on enhancing 
joint preparedness for emergency response and setting 
up mechanisms for increased coordination between 
MoE and EiE Sector partners at all levels. EiE partners 
access in northern Rakhine remains extremely limited, 
undermining the sector’s targeting process with the 
number of boys and girls targeted for assistance in 
northern Rakhine being small compared to the overall 
needs. 
Crisis-affected children have improved 
access to quality learning opportunities in 
safe protective and inclusive environment 
that promotes the protection and wellbeing 
of learners 
EiE sector partners will continue ensuring children have 
access to safe and equipped learning spaces - either in 
improved temporary learning classrooms (TLCs) or 
in Government schools hosting displaced and other 
vulnerable crisis-affected children. Priority activities will 
include: provision of teaching and learning materials 
to students, teachers or schools; rehabilitation of TLCs 
or Government schools and strengthening Parent 
Teachers’ Associations (PTA) capacity to support 
school/TLCs management. An increased focus on 
EiE cash-based interventions will also be prioritized, 
wherever feasible and appropriate, particularly for 
Kachin and northern Shan. Through a combination of 
direct service delivery in areas where MoE is currently 
unable to provide services or through 
the support of Government schools 
that are providing services to stateless or displaced 
children, partners will support increased access to Early 
Childhood Care and Development, primary education 
(formal and non-formal primary education, equivalency 
programme), formal post-primary and non-formal 
post-primary education opportunities (life skills, literacy 
and numeracy and vocational). A specific focus will 
be given to programmes that support adolescents, 
in particular girls to access meaningful education 
opportunities (formal and non-formal), including 
through safe transportation. Adolescent girls are a 
particularly excluded group, at risk of early and child 
marriage, and need tailored interventions that provide 
them with meaningful opportunities for engaging in 
society. Options for the provision of educational access 
during short-term displacement in Kachin and northern 
Shan will also be explored. 
Teachers and learning personnel (formal/ 
non-formal) have improved capacity to 
provide quality and inclusive education 
opportunities to all vulnerable crisisaffected 
children 
EiE partners will continue strengthening the capacity 
of volunteer teachers, especially females, and school 
management to ensure that children have access to 
a protective learning environment. The support will 
include the facilitation of access to MoE pre-and inservice 
capacity development opportunities, including 
the roll-out of the new national primary education 
curriculum, training of teachers in identification 
of protection issues and reporting through referral 
pathways (in camps and through the Department of 
Social Welfare in villages) as well as gender-responsive 
teaching practices. Essential life skills will be included 
in volunteer teachers’ trainings and PTA awareness 
raising to promote inclusion and social cohesion in 
school communities and beyond. 
EDUCATION OBJECTIVE 1: 1Crisis-affected children have 
improved access to quality 
learning opportunities in safe 
protective and inclusive environment 
that promotes the protection and 
well-being of learners 
RELATES TO SO1, SO2, SO3 
EDUCATION OBJECTIVE 2: 2Teachers and learning 
personnel (formal/nonformal) 
have improved 
capacity to provide quality and 
inclusive education opportunities to 
all crisis-affected girls and boys 
RELATES TO SO1, SO2, SO3 
BREAKDOWN OF PEOPLE IN NEED AND TARGETED BY STATUS 
STATES / 
REGIONS IDPs 
IDP 
returnees/ 
resettled/ 
locally 
integrated 
Nondisplaced 
stateless 
people in 
Rakhine 
Other 
vulnerable 
crisisaffected 
people 
TOTAL 
BY SEX BY AGE 
% 
Women 
% 
Children 
% 
Adult 
% 
Elderly 
People 
in need 
Kachin 40,000 100 - 13,000 53,100 49 98 2 - 
Shan 3,800 2,800 - 5,100 11,700 49 97 3 - 
Rakhine 
Northern - - 63,700 16,800 80,500 49 97 3 - 
Central 63,600 - 59,500 6,400 129,500 49 97 3 - 
Total 63,600 - 123,200 23,200 210,000 49 98 2 - 
Kayin 3,400 - - - 3,400 49 98 2 - 
Total 110,800 2,900 123,200 41,300 278,200 49 98 2 - 
People 
targeted 
Kachin 36,425 - - 6,801 43,226 55 98 2 - 
Shan 3,363 2,470 - 170 6,003 55 97 3 - 
Rakhine 
Northern - - 11,110 3,200 14,310 55 97 3 - 
Central 26,003 - 36,652 6,004 68,659 55 97 3 - 
Total 26,003 - 47,762 9,204 82,969 55 98 2 - 
Kayin 3,400 - - - 3,400 49 98 2 - 
Total 69,191 2,470 47,762 16,175 135,598 55 97 3 -

31 
PART II: Food security 
FOOD SECURITY 
The Food Security Sector (FSS) will continue to 
address the needs of vulnerable women, girls, boys 
and men in Kachin, Shan, Kayin and Rakhine 
affected by natural and human induced crises. 
Interventions will improve households’ physical and 
economic access to food, enhance their capacity to 
produce and utilize diversified foods all year round 
and increase their resilience to natural disasters. 
Ensure the targeted population has 
equitable access to sufficient, safe and 
nutritious food in-kind and/or through cash 
assistance all year round 
FSS will provide life-saving food and/or cash assistance 
to displaced and vulnerable women, girls, boys, and 
men, including those living in camps or camp-like 
settings in Kachin, Shan, Kayin and Rakhine, given 
their protracted displacement and ongoing movement 
restrictions that impede equal access to food, and/or 
income generation to cover basic food needs. In areas 
beyond government control in Kachin and northern 
Shan, FSS will continue to assist the displaced and most 
vulnerable crisis-affected people with food assistance 
through local or community-based organizations. 
Returnees/relocated people will also be supported with 
a one-time return package followed by cash-for-work 
activities to rehabilitate community assets by filling 
seasonal food gaps whenever feasible. 
FSS will ensure that vulnerable crisis-affected people 
in northern Rakhine have access to safe and nutritious 
food through the provision of emergency food 
assistance. Through coordination with state and local 
authorities, the targeting of food-insecure villages and 
vulnerable food-insecure households will commence 
when feasible. Among targeted groups, female-headed 
households with a high number of dependents, 
households with disabled members and elderly will be 
prioritized for assistance. 
Enhance resilience of targeted communities 
to restore, protect and improve livelihood 
opportunities 
Interventions that will aim at 
improving economic access, 
increasing the availability of quality and diversified food 
and reducing the use of negative coping mechanisms 
are of critical importance for FSS. Interventions should 
address immediate needs promoting cash transfer 
modalities to increase access to food and agriculture 
inputs and promote self-reliance. 
Small-scale farmers, livestock owners and fishing 
communities should receive agriculture inputs that can 
support the crop, livestock, fishery and aquaculture 
production and productivity. Cash interventions 
should be considered for the rehabilitation and 
enhancement of community productive assets, aiming 
at increasing the community’s capacity to withstand 
natural disaster. Agriculture and non-agriculture 
livelihoods programs should promote social cohesion, 
strengthen the resilience of affected communities and 
mitigate the effects of protracted crisis. Targeting will 
focus not only on the returnees and displaced people, 
but also on the non-displaced communities living in 
areas affected by natural and human induced disasters, 
as well as the host communities. Women, including 
female-headed households, will be specifically targeted 
for engagement in livelihoods opportunities by 
promoting gender-transformative and non-household 
based activities to advocate for women’s economic 
empowerment, resilience and self-reliance. 
Improve timeliness, appropriateness 
and effectiveness of food security sector 
response through food security analysis and 
dissemination 
A sound understanding of the magnitude and severity 
of food insecurity, combined with analysis of immediate 
and underlying causes is a necessity for an effective 
response. The connection between food security 
analysis and response will be enhanced through the 
expansion of existing food security monitoring and 
information management systems, and by strengthened 
links with response analysis at state and township levels 
in Kachin, Shan, Kayin and Rakhine states. 
FOOD SECURITY OBJECTIVE 1: 1Ensure the targeted population 
has equitable access to 
sufficient, safe and nutritious 
food in-kind and/or through cash 
assistance all year round 
RELATES TO SO2 
FOOD SECURITY OBJECTIVE 2: 2Enhance resilience of targeted 
communities to restore, 
protect and improve livelihood 
opportunities 
RELATES TO SO2, SO3 
# OF PARTNERS 
27 
BREAKDOWN OF PEOPLE IN NEED AND TARGETED BY STATUS 
STATES / 
REGIONS IDPs 
IDP 
returnees/ 
resettled/ 
locally 
integrated 
Nondisplaced 
stateless 
people in 
Rakhine 
Other 
vulnerable 
crisisaffected 
people 
TOTAL 
BY SEX BY AGE 
% 
Women 
% 
Children 
% 
Adult 
% 
Elderly 
People 
in need 
Kachin 97,227 475 - 35,111 132,813 51 44 49 7 
Shan 8,815 12,000 - 13,654 34,469 52 44 49 7 
Rakhine 
Northern - - 240,000 84,000 324,000 51 51 45 4 
Central 128,141 - 161,000 32,864 322,005 51 51 45 4 
Total 128,141 - 401,000 116,864 646,005 51 51 45 4 
Kayin 10,300 - - - 10,300 51 43 49 8 
Total 244,483 12,475 401,000 165,629 823,587 51 49 46 5 
People 
targeted 
Kachin 75,000 400 - 12,000 87,400 51 44 49 7 
Shan 8,800 11,600 - 13,600 34,000 52 44 49 7 
Rakhine 
Northern - - 205,000 73,000 278,000 51 51 45 4 
Central 128,000 - 53,000 32,800 213,800 51 51 45 4 
Total 128,000 - 258,000 105,800 491,800 51 51 45 4 
Kayin 10,000 - - - 10,000 51 43 49 8 
Total 221,800 12,000 258,000 131,400 623,200 51 49 46 5 
PEOPLE IN NEED 
823,587 
Kachin: 132,813 
Shan: 34,469 
Rakhine: 646,005 
Kayin: 10,300 
REQUIREMENTS (US$) 
56.8M 
Kachin: 10.3 M 
Shan: 4 M 
Rakhine: 41.8 M 
Kayin: 0.7 M 
PEOPLE TARGETED 
623,200 
Kachin: 87,400 
Shan: 34,000 
Rakhine: 491,800 
Kayin: 10,000 
FOOD SECURITY OBJECTIVE 3: 3Improve timeliness, 
appropriateness and 
effectiveness of food security 
sector response through food 
security analysis and dissemination 
RELATES TO SO1, SO2, SO3

32 
PART II: HEALTH 
HEALTH 
Improve equitable access to inclusive 
health care services including for those 
newly affected by disasters and other 
emergencies 
The Health Cluster is committed to strengthening 
its preparedness and response capacity in conflictaffected 
and underserved areas in Kachin, Shan and 
Rakhine states, including commensurate response 
to acute emergencies, through improving equitable 
access to inclusive health care. This will be achieved in 
nine priority areas: (1) ensuring a minimum package 
of primary health care services including sexual and 
reproductive health and the emergency health care 
to land mine victims wherever feasible; (2) ensuring 
emergency referrals including specific services such as 
gender-based violence (GBV) services; (3) expanding 
immunization coverage; (4) strengthening disease 
surveillance and response; (5) strengthening of 
mental health and psychosocial support services from 
health actors; (6) improving preparedness capacity 
for emergencies and disasters including disaster risk 
reduction within the Health Cluster; (7) strengthening 
advocacy to promote equitable access to inclusive 
healthcare; (8) ensuring availability of contingency 
medical supplies; (9) expanding health services 
through mobile clinics or revitalization of health 
facilities. 
Primary health care, including sexual and reproductive 
health care through the community outreach with 
support for menstrual hygiene management, will 
ensure that women, adolescent girls and children 
will continue to receive the highest possible level of 
care. Immunization program will cover people in 
hard-to-reach areas. Mental health and psychosocial 
support programs for different target groups will 
be strengthened in collaboration with relevant 
stakeholders. Initiatives to ensure support to 
vulnerable groups such as the elderly, children, people 
with disabilities, child survivors of 
GBV, pregnant and breastfeeding 
women, people living with HIV, people under TB 
treatment, and those with non-communicable, chronic 
diseases will be integrated into response efforts. 
Referrals to higher level of health care will be 
expanded, recognizing that emergency, life-saving 
interventions must come from the nearest, most 
appropriate health-facility able to render the required 
service. The cluster will support the Government 
with capacity-building on emergency preparedness 
and disaster risk reduction within the health sector 
context. The cluster will also ensure availability of 
contingency medical supplies and logistics support 
to respond to emergencies or disasters. Advocacy 
efforts to ensure equitable access to health services for 
all populations will be strengthened. The community 
will be involved and informed, particularly women 
and girls, in decision on accessibility to health 
services. Specifically, for Rakhine State, priority areas 
will be harmonized with the implementation of the 
health-related recommendations of the Rakhine 
Advisory Commission. Sustained leadership and 
effective coordination will be ensured at national and 
sub-national levels. Where feasible, the cluster will 
integrate humanitarian and development goals, align 
with national health plan, and support the expansion 
of national healthcare service towards achieving the 
Universal Health Coverage by 2030. 
# OF PARTNERS 
23 
HEALTH OBJECTIVE 1: 1Improve equitable access to 
inclusive health care services 
including for those newly 
affected by disasters and other 
emergencies 
RELATES TO S01, SO2, SO3 
BREAKDOWN OF PEOPLE IN NEED AND TARGETED BY STATUS 
STATES / 
REGIONS IDPs 
IDP 
returnees/ 
resettled/ 
locally 
integrated 
Nondisplaced 
stateless 
people in 
Rakhine 
Other 
vulnerable 
crisisaffected 
people 
TOTAL 
BY SEX BY AGE 
% 
Women 
% 
Children 
% 
Adult 
% 
Elderly 
People 
in need 
Kachin 97,227 475 - 70,221 167,923 55 30 65 5 
Shan 8,815 12,000 - 27,308 48,123 55 30 65 5 
Rakhine 
Northern - - 240,000 84,000 324,000 55 30 65 5 
Central 128,141 - 230,000 32,864 391,005 55 30 65 5 
Total 128,141 - 470,000 116,864 715,005 55 30 65 5 
Kayin 10,300 - - - 10,300 55 30 65 5 
Total 244,483 12,475 470,000 214,393 941,351 55 30 65 5 
People 
targeted 
Kachin 97,227 475 - 70,221 167,923 55 30 65 5 
Shan 8,815 12,000 - 27,308 48,123 55 30 65 5 
Rakhine 
Northern - - 240,000 84,000 324,000 55 30 65 5 
Central 128,141 - 230,000 32,864 391,005 55 30 65 5 
Total 128,141 - 470,000 116,864 715,005 55 30 65 5 
Kayin - - - - - - - - - 
Total 234,183 12,475 470,000 214,393 931,051 55 30 65 5 
PEOPLE IN NEED 
941,351 
Kachin: 167,923 
Shan: 48,123 
Rakhine: 715,005 
Kayin: 10,300 
REQUIREMENTS (US$) 
32.6M 
Kachin: 5.9 M 
Shan: 1.7 M 
Rakhine: 25 M 
PEOPLE TARGETED 
931,051 
Kachin: 167,923 
Shan: 48,123 
Rakhine: 715,005 

33 
PART II: NUTRITION 
NUTRITION 
The Nutrition Sector aims to reduce the risk of 
excessive mortality and morbidity by improving the 
nutritional status of vulnerable groups (children aged 
0-59 months and pregnant and lactating women 
(PLW)), through treatment and prevention of acute 
malnutrition and micronutrient deficiency. 
Children and women with acute 
malnutrition access appropriate 
management services 
The Nutrition sector partners will target 32,142 
children under-five years with acute malnutrition, 
5,391 with severe acute malnutrition (SAM) and 
29,100 with moderate acute malnutrition (MAM) as 
well as 3,042 PLW to cover 50 per cent of the total 
number of estimated global acute malnutrition (GAM) 
burden among affected population. In Rakhine, the 
sector will target children between 5-9 years4 with 
SAM, particularly in northern townships where the 
prevalence of GAM among children 6-59 months old 
is above 15 per cent (WHO emergency threshold). 
Approximately 30 per cent of the Government’s 
health facility in Rakhine will be supported to 
provide integrated management of cute malnutrition 
services. In addition, 64,000 children and 22,500 PLW 
will be targeted for blanket supplementary feeding 
programme to prevent nutritional deterioration among 
vulnerable people in need of humanitarian support. 
Nutritionally vulnerable children and 
women access preventive nutrition-specific 
services 
To support safe and appropriate infant and young child 
feeding (IYCF) care and practices, nutrition sector plans 
to reach some 40,000 PLW and caregiver of children 
0-24 months with counseling in Rakhine, Kachin and 
Shan. Monitoring/ assessment/observation of IYCF 
practices and appropriate practices will be reinforced 
through behavior change communication, cooking 
and responsive feeding demonstrations. For prevention 
of micronutrient deficiency, 50,326 
children 6-59 months will be reached 
with multiple micronutrient powder/sprinkles for home 
fortification of their complementary foods. Similarly, 
108,866 children under-five will receive vitamin A 
and deworming tablets through bi-annual nutrition 
campaigns around affected areas. Additionally, nutrition 
sector partners plan to reach 16,633 PLW with multiple 
micronutrient supplementation. 
Timely nutritional assessment and 
surveillance systems are strengthened and 
reinforced 
Active nutrition screening will be conducted to detect 
acute malnutrition and ensure safe and timely access 
to nutrition services in the inpatient/outpatient and 
targeted supplementary feeding programmes facilities/ 
sites. Nutrition sector plans to strengthen nutrition 
information system for real time action. Additionally, 
SMART survey will be conducted in Rakhine to 
determine any changes in nutritional status of children 
under-five and PLW for evidence-based planning of 
nutrition response. With continuous monitoring and 
coordination, the nutrition sector will also support 
emergency preparedness and response planning 
through prepositioning of emergency supplies and 
building capacities of government and partners to 
respond and deliver quality nutrition services at scale. 
Multi sector integration focus; (1) Strengthening 
community engagement and behavior change 
communications in relation to utilization of nutrition 
services, (2) Health - integration of appropriate 
nutrition services into the mobile clinics of health 
cluster partners, including nutrition support for PLW, 
(3) WASH - support rehabilitation of WASH facilitieshand-
washing, safe waste disposal and hygiene kits, 
(4) Food Security - support provided through general 
food distribution or cash transfer to enhance nutrition 
outcomes, (5) child protection- safe and supportive 
spaces for IYCF and early stimulation. 
NUTRITION OBJECTIVE 1: 1Children and women with 
acute malnutrition access 
appropriate management 
services 
RELATES TO SO1, S02 
NUTRITION OBJECTIVE 2: 2Nutritionally vulnerable 
children and women access 
preventive nutrition-specific 
services 
RELATES TO SO2, SO3 
# OF PARTNERS 
7 
BREAKDOWN OF PEOPLE IN NEED AND TARGETED BY STATUS 
STATES / 
REGIONS IDPs 
IDP 
returnees/ 
resettled/ 
locally 
integrated 
Nondisplaced 
stateless 
people in 
Rakhine 
Other 
vulnerable 
crisisaffected 
people 
TOTAL 
BY SEX BY AGE 
% 
Women 
% 
Children 
% 
Adult 
% 
Elderly 
People 
in need 
Kachin 13,126 64 - 9,480 22,670 52 70 30 - 
Shan 1,252 1,704 - 3,878 6,833 53 72 28 - 
Rakhine 
Northern - - 50,400 17,640 68,040 51 67 33 - 
Central 26,910 - 48,300 6,901 82,111 51 67 33 - 
Total 26,910 - 98,700 24,541 150,151 51 67 33 - 
Kayin 1,617 - - - 1,617 51 75 25 - 
Total 42,904 1,768 98,700 37,899 181,271 51 67 33 - 
People 
targeted 
Kachin 12,737 34 - 5,021 17,792 52 58 42 - 
Shan 1,216 900 - 2,048 4,164 52 52 48 - 
Rakhine 
Northern - - 36,960 12,936 49,896 52 69 31 - 
Central 26,013 - 35,420 5,061 66,494 52 72 28 - 
Total 26,013 - 72,380 17,997 116,390 52 72 28 - 
Kayin - - - - - - - - - 
Total 39,966 934 72,380 25,066 138,346 52 70 30 - 
PEOPLE IN NEED 
181,271 
Kachin: 22,670 
Shan: 6,833 
Rakhine: 150,151 
Kayin: 1,617 
REQUIREMENTS (US$) 
10.5M 
Kachin: 1.5 M 
Shan: 0.5 M 
Rakhine: 8.5 M 
PEOPLE TARGETED 
138,346 
Kachin: 17,792 
Shan: 4,164 
Rakhine: 116,390 
NUTRITION OBJECTIVE 3: 3Timely nutritional assessment 
and surveillance systems are 
strengthened and reinforced 
RELATES TO SO2, SO3 
4. Depending on capacity, partners may treat SAM children older than five years if identified

34 
PART II: PROTECTION 
PROTECTION 
Affected people have improved access to 
inclusive protection services 
A key priority for the Protection Sector in 2019 
will be to ensure that persons with specific needs 
across Kachin, northern Shan and Rakhine states 
have access to services tailored to their needs and 
capacities. Building on efforts undertaken over the 
past few years, protection partners will strengthen 
data collection on the needs and constraints that 
vulnerable groups face in accessing assistance and 
services. This will be achieved through strengthened 
information management systems (CPIMS, GBVIMS, 
etc.), increased protection monitoring interventions, 
an expansion of analysis of barriers and closer 
collaboration with all clusters/sectors. Tailored 
response to specific needs will also be scaled-up 
through the strengthening of referral mechanisms; 
high quality integrated protection services as a result 
of capacity-building activities; robust protection 
mainstreaming; and the delivery of direct assistance 
- in-kind and/or cash - for landmine victims, persons 
with disabilities, gender-based violence (GBV) 
survivors, and other persons with specific needs. 
Efforts will also continue to promote gender equality 
and the empowerment of women, girls and persons 
with disabilities living in displacement. 
The protection environment is improved 
by mitigating threats to mental wellbeing, 
physical and legal safety 
The dramatic deterioration of the protection 
environment in Myanmar with reports of gross human 
rights violations call for renewed advocacy efforts 
and the strengthening of communities’ capacities 
to prevent and mitigate protection threats. The 
expansion of existing incident monitoring systems (e.g. 
Protection Incident Monitoring System, Monitoring 
and Reporting on grave violations against children, 
Mine Risk) with the involvement of a greater number 
of actors will provide strong evidence-based data 
to support advocacy interventions on respect for 
international humanitarian and human rights law, 
including on the five pillars of 
mine action, with a range of key 
stakeholders at the state/region, national, regional 
and international level. Protection actors will also 
promote integrated protection capacity-building 
initiatives targeting all duty bearers at state and union 
level. Enhancing communities’ capacities to prevent 
protection risks will also remain a key priority. This 
will require the strengthening of community-based 
protection mechanisms; women, elderly, persons with 
disabilities and young people’s greater participation in 
public life, as well as socio-economic empowerment 
and leadership programming in close collaboration 
with relevant experts and other sectors. 
Durable solutions to internal displacement 
are promoted and realized in line with 
international protection standards 
While the ongoing active armed conflict in Kachin 
and northern Shan is not conducive to large-scale 
solutions, opportunities for small-scale durable or 
transitional solutions will continue to arise. Protection 
actors will advocate for these to adhere to international 
protection standards and for displaced people to be 
able to live in safety and dignity, access basic services, 
and achieve self-reliance. Another key operational 
priority for protection actors in 2019 will be to support 
displaced people to register land use rights in areas 
of return/local integration/resettlement. In Rakhine, 
the protection sector will continue promoting the 
comprehensive implementation of the Rakhine 
Advisory Commission’s recommendations through 
evidence-based advocacy with key stakeholders. 
In light of the serious concerns arising from the 
latest developments in central Rakhine, the greatest 
concern being the risk of permanent segregation of 
all Muslims displaced people, the vast majority of 
whom are stateless, and the potential to perpetuate 
such segregation, the protection sector will continue 
supporting the re-orientation of the humanitarian 
community’s engagement in central Rakhine, in 
line with the IASC Policy on the Centrality of 
Protection and the Human Rights up Front Initiative. 
# OF PARTNERS 
30 
PROTECTION OBJECTIVE 1: 1Affected people have 
improved access to inclusive 
protection services 
RELATES TO SO2 
PROTECTION OBJECTIVE 2: 2Protective environment is 
improved by mitigating 
threats to mental wellbeing, 
physical and legal safety 
RELATES TO SO2, SO3 BREAKDOWN OF PEOPLE IN NEED AND TARGETED BY STATUS 
STATES / 
REGIONS IDPs 
IDP 
returnees/ 
resettled/ 
locally 
integrated 
Nondisplaced 
stateless 
people in 
Rakhine 
Other 
vulnerable 
crisisaffected 
people 
TOTAL 
BY SEX BY AGE 
% 
Women 
% 
Children 
% 
Adult 
% 
Elderly 
People 
in need 
Kachin 97,227 475 - 70,221 167,923 51 42 52 6 
Shan 8,815 12,000 - 27,308 48,123 52 42 51 7 
Rakhine 
Northern - - 240,000 84,000 324,000 51 52 44 4 
Central 128,141 - 230,000 32,863 391,004 51 50 46 4 
Total 128,141 - 470,000 116,863 715,004 51 51 45 4 
Kayin - - - - - - - - - 
Total 234,183 12,475 470,000 214,392 931,050 51 49 46 5 
People 
targeted 
Kachin 97,227 475 - 7,000 104,702 51 42 52 6 
Shan 8,815 12,000 - 27,308 48,123 52 42 51 7 
Rakhine 
Northern - - 240,000 84,000 324,000 51 52 44 4 
Central 128,141 - 230,000 3,200 361,341 51 50 46 4 
Total 128,141 - 470,000 87,200 685,341 51 51 45 4 
Kayin - - - - - - - - - 
Total 234,183 12,475 470,000 121,508 838,166 51 49 46 5 
PEOPLE IN NEED 
931,050 
Kachin: 167,923 
Shan: 48,123 
Rakhine: 715,004 
REQUIREMENTS (US$) 
31.7M 
Kachin: 7.3 M 
Shan: 2.9 M 
Rakhine: 21.5 M 
PEOPLE TARGETED 
838,166 
Kachin: 104,702 
Shan: 48,123 
Rakhine: 685,341 
PROTECTION OBJECTIVE 3: 3Durable solutions to internal 
displacement are promoted 
and realised in line with 
international standards 
RELATES TO S01

35 
PART II: PROTECTION 
Throughout its work, the Protection Sector will continue to foster the 
operationalization of the Centrality of Protection as well as transition to 
early recovery and development response across all areas of operations. 
Child Protection (CP) Sub-Sector 
The Child Protection response strategy for 2019 aims at addressing 
the most urgent needs of 279,719 affected people (56 percent girls and 
women), whose 153,845 are children and 125,874 caregivers. Focus will 
be on prevention and response to key issues affecting the safety, wellbeing 
and full development of children, while building protective social 
systems. 
Three key strategies will support the effective delivery of services in the 
most-affected areas: 
• Strengthening inter-agency coordination and standards operating 
procedures (i.e. case management systems and referrals) and monitoring 
capacity (i.e. improving data collection, quality assurance and analysis). 
• Enhancing community-based child protection mechanisms, including 
through increased community participation, adolescent empowerment, 
awareness and capacity to prevent and respond to child abuse and 
violations. 
• Mainstreaming mental health and psychosocial services across child 
protection interventions (i.e. reintegration of children / youths associated 
with armed groups/forces, assistance to mine victims, survivors of 
abuse and violence, broader case management, parenting support, onset 
response to natural disasters, etc.). This will be achieved through focused 
and non-focused age-/gender-appropriate services aimed at ensuring 
the holistic and sustained well-being of affected children (i.e. the Child 
Survivor Initiative) and their primary caregivers. 
Accelerated effort will be made to scale up the Monitoring and Reporting 
Mechanism through increased reporting from a wider range of actors, 
within the broader agenda of preventing and responding to the six grave 
child rights violations. The Country Task Force for Monitoring and 
Reporting will continue its close engagement with all the listed parties 
to the conflict in an effort to end and prevent under-age recruitment and 
other grave violations. 
Lastly, a localization strategy will be contextualized to Myanmar, based 
on the needs and opportunities identified across all areas of operation. 
CP sub-sector will explore a fit-for-purpose modality to engage and 
support local actors with a view to achieve greater and more sustainable 
impact of the child protection in emergency programming. 
Gender-Based Violence (GBV) Sub-Sector 
The 2019 humanitarian GBV prevention and response 
plan aims to ensure that GBV risks are mitigated 
and prevented, and that GBV survivors can access 
specialized multi-sectorial services (health, psychosocial, legal, and safety 
and security). This will be achieved through the following interventions: 
• Emphasis on quality of services to support the delivery of quality 
health, mental health and psycho-social services, case management 
and other services. Service providers will be trained and supported to 
improve their response to GBV survivors. 
• Services will be inclusive and consider the specific needs and 
vulnerabilities of people living with disabilities, elderly, adolescents, 
and female-headed households including women who are divorced or 
widowed. 
• Partners will expand the availability of GBV services including through 
women and girls’ centers, by improving mobile responses to hard-toreach 
populations particularly those affected by movement restrictions. 
The strengthening of referral pathways to support timely referral and 
access to services will also be a key priority. 
• GBV mitigation and prevention strategies will focus on community 
engagement strategies (especially with men and boys), promotion of 
women and girls’ empowerment, and continued GBV mainstreaming 
across sectors/clusters. Safety audits and assessments will be conducted 
and its recommendations implemented. 
• Needs for menstrual hygiene management and other items to promote 
dignity, mobility and security for women and adolescents will be 
prioritized. 
• Partners will be supported to safely collect, store and analyze reported 
GBV incident data; safe and ethical sharing of this data will be facilitated. 
Lastly, GBV actors will strengthen support to government and nongovernment 
counterparts to raise awareness on UN Security Council 
resolutions regarding conflict-related sexual violence. 
Photo: OCHA/P. Peron

36 
PART II: Shelter/non-food items/ 
SHELTER/NON-FOOD ITEMS/ 
CAMP COORDINATION AND CAMP 
MANAGEMENT 
Shelter/NFI: Protect dignity, security and 
privacy through provision of shelter/NFIs 
In Kachin/Shan, the cluster will provide emergency 
assistance to newly displaced people through shelter and 
NFI interventions and address remaining shelter gaps 
that could not be addressed in 2018. Interventions will 
also be carried out to replace sub-standard/no longer 
habitable shelters to ensure minimum standards are met 
and protection risks associated with overcrowding and 
lack of privacy such as gender-based violence (GBV) 
are mitigated. In 2019, the cluster plans to provide/ 
rehabilitate approximately 5,600 shelter units for some 
28,000 people inside and outside of camp sites. Since 
NFI needs have been addressed over the past years, 
distributions in 2019 will only target newly displaced 
and persons with specific needs. In addition, shelter 
and NFI interventions will support the realization of 
small-scale solutions for IDPs wherever feasible and 
appropriate, in close coordination with other actors and 
in consultation with women and vulnerable groups. 
In central Rakhine, the cluster will prioritize the 
rehabilitation of some 900 shelter units for 40,000 
people. These include shelters over two years old, 25 
per cent of shelters reconstructed in 2017, and fullcoverage 
using the upgraded 2018 design in the two 
largest camps in Sittwe. These upgrades aim to reduce 
protection risks and improve shelters’ resilience to harsh 
weather conditions. However, in view of the risk of 
permanent segregation of Muslims in central Rakhine, 
the Cluster will not carry out any shelter activities in 
the “relocation sites” established by the Government as 
part of its “closure of camps” plan. Another key priority 
for the cluster will be the installation of solar lighting 
in the camps as part of efforts to improve IDPs’ living 
conditions and mitigate protection risks, especially 
gender-based violence in the camps. These interventions 
will also benefit surrounding communities. In 
the absence of needs assessments due to lack of 
authorizations, NFI blanket distributions will be carried 
out for 14,000 families. 
CCCM: Support management and service 
provision 
Across Rakhine, Kachin and northern Shan, the 
CCCM cluster’s key priorities will be to strengthen site 
monitoring and beneficiaries’ access to information 
so as to ensure that IDPs and their host communities 
have inclusive access to basic services and that 
persons with specific needs receive assistance tailored 
to their needs and capacities. Capacity-building 
of community groups as well as state/township/ 
local CCCM authorities, with particular focus 
on government camp focal points and appointed 
Camp Management Committees (CMC), will 
aim to improve the representative nature, genderbalanced 
and effectiveness of camp committees and 
community groups and ensure that community-based 
development approaches are integrated into planning 
and implementation. Another key priority will be 
to enhance joint humanitarian and government 
emergency preparedness and capacity also on gender 
and GBV. 
In central Rakhine, constructive advocacy with the 
Government will continue for the comprehensive 
implementation of the Rakhine Advisory 
Commission’s recommendations, including those 
relating to the CMC reform that has been pending 
since February 2017. However, as mentioned above, 
given the risk of permanent segregation of all 
Muslims, some of the CCCM activities will not be 
implemented in the new relocation/IDP sites. The 
Cluster will continue contributing to the discussion on 
the principles that should underpin the humanitarian 
community’s future engagement in central Rakhine 
and will develop a CCCM transition plan accordingly, 
in close collaboration with other clusters/sectors. 
SHELTER (NFI) OBJECTIVE 1: 1IDPs receive protection from 
the elements to support 
their dignity, security and 
privacy through provision of NFIs 
and emergency, temporary or 
semi-permanent shelter where 
appropriate 
RELATES TO SO1, S02 
CCCM OBJECTIVE 2: 2Support management and 
service provision in IDP camps 
to improve IDPs’ quality of life 
RELATES TO S01, SO2, SO3 
# OF PARTNERS 
31 
BREAKDOWN OF PEOPLE IN NEED AND TARGETED BY STATUS 
PART II: SHELTER/NFI/CCCM 
STATES / 
REGIONS IDPs 
IDP 
returnees/ 
resettled/ 
locally 
integrated 
Nondisplaced 
stateless 
people in 
Rakhine 
Other 
vulnerable 
crisisaffected 
people 
TOTAL 
BY SEX BY AGE 
% 
Women 
% 
Children 
% 
Adult 
% 
Elderly 
People 
in need 
Kachin 97,227 475 - 14,000 111,702 52 45 48 7 
Shan 8,815 - - 18,000 26,815 52 42 51 7 
Rakhine 
Northern - - - - - - - - - 
Central 128,141 - - - 128,141 51 53 43 4 
Total 128,141 - - - 128,141 51 53 43 4 
Kayin - - - - - - - - - 
Total 234,183 475 - 32,000 266,658 52 48 46 6 
People 
targeted 
Kachin 93,000 - - 8,000 101,000 52 45 48 7 
Shan 8,815 - - 10,000 18,815 52 42 51 7 
Rakhine 
Northern - - - - - - - - - 
Central 128,141 - - - 128,141 51 53 43 4 
Total 128,141 - - - 128,141 51 53 43 4 
Kayin - - - - - - - - - 
Total 229,956 - - 18,000 247,956 52 48 46 6 
PEOPLE IN NEED 
266,658 
Kachin: 111,702 
Shan: 26,815 
Rakhine: 128,141 
REQUIREMENTS (US$) 
22.4M 
Kachin: 6.4 M 
Shan: 1.5 M 
Rakhine: 14.5 M 
PEOPLE TARGETED 
247,956 
Kachin: 101,000 
Shan: 18,815 
Rakhine: 128,141 

37 
PART II: Water , Sanitati on and Hygiene 
WATER, SANITATION AND HYGIENE 
Improve the targeted population healthseeking 
behaviour and dignity by ensuring 
safe and equitable access to WASH 
services, goods, information /knowledge 
and facilities 
The protracted humanitarian situation in Rakhine, 
Kachin and Shan states continue to require new 
approaches to deliver WASH services for crisis 
affected populations. Water supply, sanitation and 
bathing facilities in IDP camps remain temporary in 
design in view of cost effectiveness consideration and 
projected return and relocation of people. Operation 
and maintenance of these temporary facilities are a 
priority in 2019 to bring facilities to meet agreed cluster 
standards. Targeted hygiene supplies, based on needs 
and vulnerability, and hygiene promotion to all will 
continue to be provided. Where feasible, the WASH 
Cluster will continue to adopt approaches, which 
optimize cost effectiveness and efficiency of service 
delivery as well as integrate with the local market 
system. For non-displaced people affected by conflict 
and with restricted freedom of movement, critical 
malnutrition rates, lack of access to basic services and 
livelihoods, WASH interventions remain a critical 
component to meet their basic public health needs. 
For other vulnerable crisis-affected people, the WASH 
Cluster will adopt a conflict-sensitivity approach and 
address WASH needs where it is complementary to 
the humanitarian-development nexus or contextually 
required. 
In 2019, the WASH Cluster will focus on the following 
activities: 
• Continue provision of WASH services including safe 
water, sanitation, hygiene goods and information, and 
operation and maintenance services with focus on 
quality and resilience to 487,648 people; 
• The WASH cluster will prioritize inclusive WASH 
services for persons with special needs and most 
vulnerable including children, women and girls, elderly 
and pregnant women; 
• The WASH cluster will continue to focus on expanding 
water quality monitoring treatment at scale; 
• Mainstream protection with 
particular focus on the needs of 
persons with disabilities as well 
as menstrual hygiene management (MHM) in 
collaboration with the other relevant sectors; 
• Integrate WASH including MHM in temporary 
learning facilities programme in collaboration with the 
Education Sector; 
• Continue to strengthen capacity for WASH-related 
disease outbreak response in collaboration with the 
Health Cluster and the State Health Department; 
• Improve accountability to affected populations 
through more robust and inclusive complaints and 
feedback mechanisms; 
• Increase integration of maintenance and monitoring of 
WASH services in camps in collaboration with CCCM; 
• Mainstream market-based WASH approaches 
including cash transfer programming in collaboration 
with other sectors for multi-purpose response where 
feasible and appropriate; 
• Support to localize the response where appropriate 
and bridge humanitarian and development efforts 
through national/state Government, non-state actors, 
local CSOs, academic institutions and the private sector 
to participate in humanitarian WASH service delivery 
and make contributions to development; 
• Support for implementation of new Government-led 
WASH strategies, policies and disaster management laws, 
guidelines and coordination initiatives that are in 
accordance with international standards and law; 
• Coordinate efforts to promote safe hygiene and 
nutritional practices in collaboration with health, food 
security, protection and nutrition actors; 
• Conduct multi-sector need assessments where feasible 
and emergency preparedness and response planning to 
better identify needs and priorities with consideration to 
most vulnerable segments of the population including 
children, women and girls, and persons with special needs. 
# OF PARTNERS 
27 
WASH OVERALL OBJECTIVE 1: 1Improve the targeted 
population health-seeking 
behaviour and dignity by 
ensuring safe and equitable access to 
WASH services, goods, information/ 
knowledge and facilities 
RELATES TO S01, SO2, SO3 
BREAKDOWN OF PEOPLE IN NEED AND TARGETED BY STATUS 
STATES / 
REGIONS IDPs 
IDP 
returnees/ 
resettled/ 
locally 
integrated 
Nondisplaced 
stateless 
people in 
Rakhine 
Other 
vulnerable 
crisisaffected 
people 
TOTAL 
BY SEX BY AGE 
% 
Women 
% 
Children 
% 
Adult 
% 
Elderly 
People 
in need 
Kachin 97,227 475 - 44,473 142,175 51 42 51 7 
Shan 8,815 12,000 - 27,308 48,123 52 42 51 7 
Rakhine 
Northern - - 240,000 84,000 324,000 51 50 46 4 
Central 128,141 - 230,000 32,864 391,005 51 52 44 4 
Total 128,141 - 470,000 116,864 715,005 51 51 45 4 
Kayin 10,300 - - - 10,300 51 43 49 8 
Total 244,483 12,475 470,000 188,645 915,603 51 49 46 5 
People 
targeted 
Kachin 83,733 100 - 18,141 101,974 51 42 51 7 
Shan 8,654 - - 6,484 15,138 52 42 51 7 
Rakhine 
Northern - - 76,000 40,064 116,064 51 50 46 4 
Central 111,059 - 119,348 24,065 254,472 51 52 44 4 
Total 111,059 - 195,348 64,129 370,536 51 51 45 4 
Kayin - - - - - - - - - 
Total 203,446 100 195,348 88,754 487,648 51 49 46 5 
PEOPLE IN NEED 
915,603 
Kachin: 142,175 
Shan: 48,123 
Rakhine: 715,005 
Kayin: 10,300 
REQUIREMENTS (US$) 
27.2M 
Kachin: 6.6 M 
Shan: 0.9 M 
Rakhine: 19.7 M 
PEOPLE TARGETED 
487,648 
Kachin: 101,974 
Shan: 15,138 
Rakhine: 370,536 

38 
PART II: COORDINATION AND COMMON SERVICES 
Coordination 
The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs 
(OCHA) will continue to provide dedicated support 
to the Humanitarian Coordinator and the Humanitarian Country 
Team with a focus on the following activities: (1) maintaining inclusive 
coordination mechanisms at national and sub-national levels to ensure 
principled, timely and effective humanitarian response; (2) facilitating 
joint situational awareness and joint analysis of humanitarian needs, 
gaps and response to support decision making and coherence planning; 
(3) facilitating joint strategic planning for humanitarian response, as 
well as joint monitoring and reporting; (4) mobilizing flexible and 
predictable humanitarian funding and ensure effective use of Central 
Emergency Response Fund (CERF) and the Myanmar Humanitarian 
Fund (MHF); (5) advocating for the protection of civilians and sustained 
humanitarian access to all women, men, girls and boys in need; and 
(6) supporting efforts to strengthen national capacities to prepare 
for and respond to natural disasters and other emergencies. OCHA 
will continue to liaise with the Government, relevant line ministries, 
State authorities and non-State actors on humanitarian issues. OCHA 
will facilitate the updating of the Humanitarian Needs Overview 
and the Humanitarian Response Plan. OCHA will coordinate the 
HCT Contingency Planning Process, including the updating of the 
Emergency Response Preparedness Plan and joint simulation exercises. 
OCHA will support information management and will provide 
regular updates and analysis to inform partners and the international 
community on key humanitarian developments. OCHA will also 
support the Humanitarian Country Team and the Inter-Cluster 
Coordination Group in integrating key cross-cutting issues into relevant 
planning processes and response. OCHA will support implementation 
and monitoring of the 2019 response strategy, with a specific focus on 
implementing the Agenda for Humanity in line with the outcomes of 
the World Humanitarian Summit. 
Information Management 
The Myanmar Information Management Unit 
(MIMU) is a service offered through the Office of the 
UN Resident and Humanitarian Coordinator to provide information 
management (IM) support to humanitarian and development actors 
across Myanmar. MIMU will continue to focus on the following 
activities: (1) safeguarding the common data and information 
repository and operational datasets supporting development and 
humanitarian activities; (2) producing updated base and hazard maps 
and other information products to support preparedness, response 
and recovery; (3) maintaining updated 3W information (who is doing 
what, where), contact lists, assessment tracking, and meeting schedules; 
(4) leading the Information Management Network bringing together 
IM focal points from across agencies, clusters and sectors to promote 
coordinated and standardized approaches to information management 
for preparedness, emergency response and recovery activities; and 
(5) providing IM support and training to agencies, Government 
departments and the Emergency Operations Centre of the Relief and 
Resettlement Department to strengthen IM capacity. MIMU makes its 
information and analytical products as well as those of other agencies 
accessible to the wider groups of stakeholders through the MIMU 
website. In addition, OCHA, WFP, UNHCR and clusters/sectors provide 
information management capacity on specific sectors/ themes including 
sex and age disaggregated data. 
Staff Safety and Security 
The United Nations Department of Safety and 
Security (UNDSS) will continue to focus on enabling 
humanitarian activities while ensuring the safety and security of 
humanitarian workers as a high priority. This will be achieved through 
improved information gathering and analysis for evidence-based 
assessments and decision-making. Common inter-agency missions 
to areas with challenging security situations will continue to enhance 
access and operational impact. Safety and security-related incidents 
that impact staff safety, continuity of activities, or affect access, will be 
tracked to determine trends and appropriate courses of action. Safety 
and security-related information, assessments and reports will continue 
to be shared with implementing and operational humanitarian partners 
to ensure situational awareness. On behalf of the United Nations 
Security Management System, UNDSS will continue to function as 
the focal point for regular security cooperation with implementing 
and operational humanitarian partners. The establishment of an 
Inter-Agency Emergency Communications System (ECS) is subject to 
Government approval and efforts will continue to achieve this as part 
of broader disaster preparedness, crisis management, and coordinated 
response plans. The proposed ECS will use Digital Mobile Radio (DMR) 
communications and satellite communications rather than relying on 
mobile telephone networks and will be established to cover Rakhine, 
Kachin, and Shan states. 
REQUIREMENTS (US$) COORDINATION AND COMMON SERVICES 
4M Greg Puley: puley@un.org 
Paschal Badong: paschal.badong@un.org 
Shon Campbell: manager.mimu@undp.org 
Coordination and Common Services covers the following three areas of work: (1) 
Coordination, (2) Information Management, and (3) Staff Safety and Security 

REGISTERING AND RECOGNIZING YOUR CONTRIBUTIONS 
OCHA manages the Financial Tracking Service (FTS), which records all reported humanitarian contributions 
(cash, in-kind, multilateral and bilateral) to emergencies. Its aim is to give credit and visibility to 
donors for their generosity and to show the total amount of funding and resource gaps in humanitarian 
appeals. Please report your contributions to FTS, either by email to fts@un.org or through the on-line 
contribution report form at http://fts.unocha.org. 
GUIDE TO GIVING 
CONTRIBUTING TO 
THE HUMANITARIAN 
RESPONSE PLAN 
Myanmar’s humanitarian response 
plan provides sector-specific 
descriptions of the activities 
required to address the needs of the 
affected people, and the estimated 
funding requirements to address 
these needs. The plan contains 
contact information for each of 
the sectors. To learn more about 
the outstanding gaps, needs, and 
possible implementing partners, 
download the plan from: 
www.humanitarian 
response.info 
DONATING THROUGH 
THE CENTRAL 
EMERGENCY RESPONSE FUND 
(CERF) 
The CERF provides rapid initial 
funding for life-saving actions at the 
onset of emergencies and for poorly 
funded, essential humanitarian 
operations in protracted crises. The 
OCHA-managed CERF receives 
contributions from various donors 
– mainly governments, but also 
private companies, foundations, 
charities and individuals – which 
are combined into a single fund, 
to be used for crises anywhere in 
the world. Between 2006 and 2018, 
CERF has provided Myanmar with 
$118 million to address priority lifesaving 
needs. Find out more about 
the CERF and how to donate by 
visiting the CERF website: 
www.unocha.org/ 
cerf/our-donors/ 
how-donate 
DONATING THROUGH 
THE MYANMAR 
HUMANITARIAN FUND 
The Myanmar Humanitarian Fund 
(MHF) is a multi-donor pooled 
fund that provides humanitarian 
organizations with rapid and 
flexible in-country funding to 
address critical funding gaps in 
the core humanitarian response, 
and to respond quickly to urgent 
emergency needs. Further 
information on country-based 
pooled funds can be found here: 
http://www.unocha.org/myanmar/ 
humanitarian-financing/myanmarhumanitarian-
fund-mhf 
To learn more about the MHF, 
please send an email to: 
mhf-myanmar@un.org 
IN-KIND RELIEF AID 
The United Nations urges donors to make cash rather than in-kind donations, for maximum speed and 
flexibility, and to ensure the aid materials that are most needed are the ones delivered. If you can make only in-kind 
contributions in response to disasters and emergencies, please contact: 
logik@un.org 
HRP

40 
PART I: Summary of needs, tar gets & requirements ONLY 37% OF DISPLACED PEOPLE IN RAKHINE STATE HAVE SAFE 
ACCESS TO A SUFFICIENT QUANTITY OF DRINKING WATER. 
Photo: UNICEF/Brown

41 
PART I: Summary of needs, tar gets & requirements 
Objectives, indicators & targets ....................................... 42 
Planning figures: people in need and targeted ............. 46 
What if? ... we fail to respond ........................................... 48 
PART III: ANNEXES

42 
PART III - ANNEXES: Objecti ves, indicat ors & tar gets 
OBJECTIVES, INDICATORS & TARGETS 
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES, INDICATORS AND TARGETS 
Education Objective 1: Crisis-affected children have improved access to quality 
learning opportunities in safe protective and inclusive environment that promotes the 
protection and well-being of learners 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET 
Number and percent of targeted children (3-10) accessing 
(attending) pre-primary/primary learning opportunities 
146,610 
Kachin: 27,972 
Shan: 6,156 
Rakhine: 110,700 
Kayin: 1,782 
39,666 
Kachin: 3,935 
Shan: 1,252 
Rakhine: 34,479 
95,062 
(Male: 42,778, Female: 52,284) 
Kachin: 27,386 
Shan: 2,500 
Rakhine: 61,896 
Kayin: 3,280 
Number and percent of targeted adolescents (11-17) accessing postprimary 
learning opportunities 
124,890 
Kachin: 23,828 
Shan: 5,244 
Rakhine: 94,300 
Kayin: 1,518 
8,496 
Kachin: 2,959 
Shan: 1,712 
Rakhine: 3,825 
37,837 
(Male: 17,027, Female: 20,810) 
Kachin: 14,756 
Shan: 3,143 
Rakhine: 19,938 
Education Objective 2: Teachers and learning personnel (formal/non-formal) have 
improved capacity to provide quality and inclusive education opportunities to all crisisaffected 
girls and boys 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET 
Number of formal/non-formal teachers/facilitators who 
have completed trainings to provide quality and inclusive 
education to children (including pre-primary, primary, postprimary, 
life skills/vocational) 
6,700 
Kachin: 1,300 
Shan: 300 
Rakhine: 5,000 
Kayin: 100 
1,291 
Kachin: 453 
Shan: 293 
Rakhine: 545 
2,699 
(Male: 1,215, Female: 1,484) 
Kachin: 1084 
Shan: 360 
Rakhine: 1,135 
Kayin: 120 
SECTOR OBJECTIVES, INDICATORS AND TARGETS 
Food Security Objective 1: Ensure the targeted population has equitable access to 
sufficient, safe and nutritious food in-kind and/or through cash assistance all year round 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET 
Number of people who received food and/or cash assistance 499,769 
Kachin: 98,000 
Shan: 34,469 
Rakhine: 357,000 
Kayin: 10,300 
434,000 
Kachin: 81,000 
Shan: 14,000 
Rakhine: 339,000 
Kayin: N/A 
452,000 
(Male: 221,480, Female: 230,520) 
Kachin: 55,000 
Shan: 34,000 
Rakhine: 357,000 
Kayin: 6,000 
Percentage of households with an adequate Food Consumption Score (FCS>35) 90% 90% 90% 
Food Security Objective 2: Enhance resilience of targeted communities to restore, 
protect and improve livelihood opportunities 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET 
Number of people who received agriculture and other livelihood 
support, contributing to household food security 
400,769 
Kachin: 18,000 
Shan: 34,469 
Rakhine: 338,000 
Kayin: 10,300 
138,000 
Kachin: 7,000 
Shan: 12,000 
Rakhine: 119,000 
Kayin: N/A 
350,400 
(Male: 171,696, Female: 178,704) 
Kachin: 37,800 
Shan: 25,600 
Rakhine: 282,000 
Kayin: 5,000 
Percentage of people who received cash contributing to improve 
livelihood conditions 
N/A N/A 25% 
relates to 
S01, S02, S03 
relates to 
S01, S02, S03 
relates to 
S02 
relates to 
S02, S03

43 
PART III - ANNEXES: Objecti ves, indicat ors & tar gets 
OBJECTIVES, INDICATORS & TARGETS 
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES, INDICATORS AND TARGETS 
Health Objective 1: Improve equitable access to inclusive health care services including 
for those newly affected by disasters and other emergencies 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET 
Number of affected population accessed to primary health care 
services 
941,351 
Kachin: 167,923 
Shan: 48,123 
Rakhine: 715,005 
Kayin: 10,300 
170,190* 
Kachin: 23,655 
Shan: 4,525 
Rakhine: 142,010 
931,051 
(Male: 456,102, Female: 
474,949) 
Kachin: 167,923 
Shan: 48,123 
Rakhine: 715,005 
SECTOR OBJECTIVES, INDICATORS AND TARGETS 
Nutrition Objective 1: Children and women with acute malnutrition access appropriate 
management services 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET 
Number of children aged 6-59 months with severe acute 
malnutrition admitted to therapeutic care in Rakhine. 
10,781 N/A 5,391 
(Male: 2,588, Female: 2,803) 
Number of children aged 6-59 months with moderate 
acute malnutrition admitted to supplementary feeding 
program in Rakhine 
37,064 N/A 29,100 
(Male: 13,968, Female: 
15,132) 
Cure rate among SAM and MAM children 6-59 months 
Death rate among SAM and MAM children 6-59 months 
Defaulter rate among SAM and MAM children 6-59 months 
N/A Rakhine: 
Cure rate 83.6% 
Death rate: 0.3% 
Defaulter rate: 8.3% 
Stabilization center 
Cure rate > 75% 
Death rate < 10% 
Defaulter rate < 15% 
Outpatient programme 
Cure rate > 75% 
Death rate < 10% 
Defaulter rate < 15% 
Supplementary feeding 
programme 
Cure rate > 75% 
Death rate < 3% 
Defaulter rate < 15% 
Nutrition Objective 2: Nutritionally vulnerable children and women access preventive 
nutrition-specific services 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET 
Number of pregnant and lactating women who receive messages on 
infant and young child feeding** 
58,692 
Kachin: 6,717 
Shan: 1,925 
Rakhine: 50,050 
N/A 39,179 
(Male: 18,806, Female: 
20,373) 
Kachin: 5,197 
Shan: 1,261 
Rakhine: 32,721 
relates to 
S01, S02, S03 
relates to 
S01, S02 
relates to 
S02, S03 
**IYCF messages in emergencies will focus on early initiation of Breastfeeding, Exclusive Breastfeeding, adequate complementary feeding and 
continued breastfeeding until two years. 
*2018 HRP mid-year monitoring report.

44 
PART III - ANNEXES: Objecti ves, indicat ors & tar gets 
OBJECTIVES, INDICATORS & TARGETS 
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES, INDICATORS AND TARGETS 
Protection Objectives 1, 2 & 3: Protection services are improved, expanded and 
more accessible; Protective environment is improved by mitigating threats to mental 
wellbeing, physical and legal safety; Durable solutions to internal displacement are 
promoted and realized in line with international standards. 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET 
Number of people in need with access to minimum available 
protection services. 
931,050 
Kachin: 167,923 
Shan: 48,123 
Rakhine: 715,004 
N/A 838,166 
(Male: 410,701, Female: 
427,465) 
Kachin: 104,702 
Shan: 48,123 
Rakhine: 685,341 
Number of people in need with access to minimum available 
protection services 
(Child Protection) 
697,043 
Kachin: 102,779 
Shan: 48,123 
Rakhine: 546,141 
N/A 279,719 
(Male: 123,076, Female: 
156,643) 
Kachin: 102,779 
Shan: 48,123 
Rakhine: 128,817 
Number of people in need with access to minimum available 
protection services 
(Gender-Based Violence) 
512,553 
Kachin: 82,480 
Shan: 13,902 
Rakhine: 416,171 
N/A 226,271 
(Male: 67,881, Female: 
158,390) 
Kachin: 61,010 
Shan: 9,772 
Rakhine: 155,489 
SECTOR OBJECTIVES, INDICATORS AND TARGETS 
Shelter/NFIs Objective 1: IDPs receive protection from the elements to support their 
dignity, security and privacy through provision of NFIs and emergency, temporary or 
semi-permanent shelter where appropriate 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET 
Number of IDPs with access to temporary shelter in accordance with 
minimum standards 
197,574 
Kachin: 77,781 
Shan: 7,052 
Rakhine: 112,741 
28,400 
Kachin: 12,000 
Shan: 1,000 
Rakhine: 15,400 
68,000 
(Male: 32,640, Female: 
35,360) 
Kachin: 25,000 
Shan: 3,000 
Rakhine: 40,000 
CCCM Objective 1: Support management and service provision in IDP camps to 
improve IDPs’ quality of life 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET 
Number of IDPs in camp/camp-like settings that have equitable 
access to basic services 
234,183 
Kachin: 97,227 
Shan: 8,815 
Rakhine: 128,141 
213,702 
Kachin: 86,132 
Shan: 7,070 
Rakhine: 120,500 
221,343 
(Male: 106,245, Female: 
115,098) 
Kachin: 86,132 
Shan: 7,070 
Rakhine: 128,141 
relates to 
S01, S02, S03 
relates to 
S01, S02 
relates to 
S01, S02, S03

45 
PART III - ANNEXES: Objecti ves, indicat ors & tar gets 
OBJECTIVES, INDICATORS & TARGETS 
SECTOR OBJECTIVES, INDICATORS AND TARGETS 
WASH Overall Objective: Improve the targeted population health-seeking behaviour 
and dignity by ensuring safe and equitable access to WASH services, goods, information/ 
knowledge and facilities 
WASH Sub-Objective 1: Ensure equitable and safe access to safe/improved drinking water meeting 
demand for domestic purposes, at minimum/agreed standards 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET 
Percentage of women, men, boys and girls benefitting from safe/ 
improved drinking water, meeting demand for domestic purposes, at 
minimum/agreed standards 
915,603 
Kachin: 142,175 
Shan: 48,123 
Rakhine: 715,005 
Kayin: 10,300 
243,617 
Kachin: 82,721 
Shan: 9,256 
Rakhine: 151,640 
487,648 
(Male: 238,948, Female: 
248,700) 
Kachin: 101,974 
Shan: 15,138 
Rakhine: 370,536 
Kayin: 0 
This overall target includes both safe/improved drinking water sources and unimproved water sources used for domestic purposes. 
WASH Sub-Objective 2: Ensure equitable and safe access to functional excreta disposal systems 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET 
Percentage of targeted women, men, boys and girls benefitting from 
a functional excreta disposal system, reducing safety/public health/ 
environmental risks 
915,603 
Kachin: 142,175 
Shan: 48,123 
Rakhine: 715,005 
Kayin: 10,300 
184,716 
Kachin: 72,596 
Shan: 8,141 
Rakhine: 103,979 
487,648 
(Male: 238,948, Female: 
248,700) 
Kachin: 101,974 
Shan: 15,138 
Rakhine: 370,536 
Kayin: 0 
Functional excreta system includes sanitation facilities and management including collection, transportation and excreta disposal. 
WASH Sub-Objective 3: Ensure equitable and safe access to hygiene items and 
community tailored messages enabling health seeking behavior 
INDICATOR IN NEED BASELINE TARGET 
Percentage of targeted women, men, boys and girls benefitting from 
timely/adequate/tailored personal hygiene items and receiving 
appropriate/ community tailored messages that enable health 
seeking behaviour 
915,603 
Kachin: 142,175 
Shan: 48,123 
Rakhine: 715,005 
Kayin: 10,300 
194,188 
Kachin: 52,767 
Shan: 8,067 
Rakhine: 133,354 
487,648 
(Male: 238,948, Female: 
248,700) 
Kachin: 101,974 
Shan: 15,138 
Rakhine: 370,536 
Kayin: 0 
Community tailored messages reaches the whole community, while hygiene items are received by a targeted section of the community based on 
vulnerability and need analysis. 
SECTOR OBJECTIVES, INDICATORS AND TARGETS 
Accountability to Affected People 
INDICATOR 
Percentage of affected people who feel informed about the different services available to them 
Percentage of affected people who know how to and feel comfortable to make suggestions or complaints (including report on abuse, mistreatment or harassment) to aid 
providers 
relates to 
S01, S02, S03

46 
PART III - ANNEXES: Planning figures: people in need and tar geted 
PLANNING FIGURES: PEOPLE IN NEED AND TARGETED 
KACHIN 
INTERNALLY 
DISPLACED 
PERSONS1 
NON-DISPLACED PERSONS 
TOTAL 
IDP returnees/ resettled/ 
locally integrated² 
Non-displaced 
stateless people in 
Rakhine³ 
Other vulnerable 
crisis-affected 
TOWNSHIP people4 
KACHIN 
BHAMO 8,100 - - 4,281 12,381 
CHIPWI 2,904 - - 1,512 4,416 
HPAKANT 3,949 - - 5,981 9,930 
INJANGYANG - 375 - 650 1,025 
MANSI 13,408 - - 3,999 17,407 
MOGAUNG 1,478 100 - 9,063 10,641 
MOHNYIN 399 - - 4,160 4,559 
MOMAUK 24,865 - - 2,803 27,668 
MYITKYINA 12,997 - - 14,156 27,153 
PUTA-O 412 - - 1,490 1,902 
SHWEGU 541 - - - 541 
SUMPRABUM 1,001 - - 900 1,901 
TANAI 1,285 - - 7,147 8,432 
WAINGMAW 25,888 - - 14,079 39,967 
TOTAL KACHIN 97,227 475 - 70,221 167,923 
SHAN 
INTERNALLY 
DISPLACED 
PERSONS1 
NON-DISPLACED PERSONS 
TOTAL 
IDP returnees/ resettled/ 
locally integrated² 
Non-displaced 
stateless people in 
Rakhine³ 
Other vulnerable 
crisis-affected 
TOWNSHIP people4 
SHAN 
MON KAING - - - 500 500 
HSENI 168 - - 2,456 2,624 
HSIPAW 120 - - 4,197 4,317 
KUTKAI 4,169 - - 6,572 10,741 
KYAUKME - - - 1,043 1,043 
KYETHI - - - 100 100 
LASHIO - - - 608 608 
MANTON 541 - - - 541 
MUSE 1,051 - - 602 1,653 
NAMHKAN 2,010 - - 2,632 4,642 
NAMTU 756 - - 8,423 9,179 
NAMHSAN - - - 175 175 
KOKANG SAZ4 - 12,000 - - 12,000 
TOTAL SHAN 8,815 12,000 - 27,308 48,123 
PEOPLE TARGETED BY THE 
HUMANITARIAN COUNTRY TEAM 
IN 2019

47 
PART III - ANNEXES: Planning figures: people in need and tar geted 
1.IDP figures (including relocated IDPs) provided by CCCM cluster as of 31 July 2018. For Kayin, the source is UNHCR. 
2. For Kachin (Injangyang and Mogaung), the source is UNHCR. For Shan (Kokang), the source is the Food Security Sector. 
3. Figures for non-displaced stateless people remaining in Rakhine State are provided by the UN and partners. These are based on the best information available at 
the time of planning, noting limitations including lack of authorization to conduct assessments, inability to verify information independently, and other restrictions. 
4. This includes 30% of the local population in conflict-affected village tracts (excluding the main urban areas) in Kachin and Shan, and the non-Muslim 
population in the village tracts that are mixed (excluding the main urban areas) in Rakhine. It also includes a total of over 28,000 newly displaced people in 
Kachin and northern Shan since Jan 2018. 
RAKHINE 
INTERNALLY 
DISPLACED 
PERSONS1 
NON-DISPLACED PERSONS 
TOTAL 
IDP returnees/ resettled/ 
locally integrated² 
Non-displaced 
stateless people in 
Rakhine³ 
Other vulnerable 
crisis-affected 
TOWNSHIP people4 
RAKHINE 
KYAUKPYU 1,050 - - 1,934 2,984 
KYAUKTAW 546 - 63,000 9,980 73,526 
MINBYA - - 32,000 5,633 37,633 
MRAUK-U - - 27,000 2,679 29,679 
MYEBON 2,690 - - 974 3,664 
PAUKTAW 22,225 - 16,000 6,796 45,021 
PONNAGYUN - - 2,000 - 2,000 
SITTWE 101,630 - 90,000 4,868 196,498 
MAUNGDAW - - 76,000 28,000 104,000 
BUTHIDAUNG - - 154,000 46,000 200,000 
RATHEDAUNG - - 10,000 10,000 20,000 
TOTAL RAKHINE 128,141 - 470,000 116,864 715,005 
TOTAL PEOPLE IN 
NEED/TARGETED 244,483 12,475 470,000 214,393 941,351 
KAYIN 
INTERNALLY 
DISPLACED 
PERSONS1 
NON-DISPLACED PERSONS 
TOTAL 
IDP returnees/ resettled/ 
locally integrated² 
Non-displaced 
stateless people in 
Rakhine³ 
Other vulnerable 
crisis-affected 
TOWNSHIP people4 
KAYIN 
HLAINGBWE 10,300 - - - 10,300 
TOTAL KAYIN 10,300 - - - 10,300

48 
PART III - ANNEXES: Planning figures: people in need and tar geted
WHAT IF? 
...WE FAIL TO RESPOND 
UNSAFE WATER AND 
SANITATION WILL 
EXPOSE THOUSANDS TO DISEASES 
Without continued support from 
humanitarian organizations, over 
487,648 people will not have adequate 
access to safe water, hygiene and basic 
sanitation. Outbreaks of preventable 
communicable and water-borne 
diseases could occur. Young children 
are the first to get sick and die from 
waterborne and sanitation-related 
illnesses. Poor living conditions of 
the displaced in overcrowded camps 
and collective shelters could further 
exacerbate the risk of illness and death 
from diseases. Water scarcity during the 
dry season is prevalent in both Rakhine 
and Kachin leaving approximately 
30,000 people at risk each year. 
INCREASED RISK OF 
FOOD INSECURITY FOR 
VULNERABLE PEOPLE 
The food security status of over 
623,000 people in Rakhine, Kachin, 
Shan and Kayin states will further 
degrade without well-coordinated and 
evidence-based food assistance and 
livelihood support. Reduced access 
to safe and nutritious food may result 
in increased malnutrition, intensified 
use of negative coping strategies and 
overall deterioration of food security. 
In addition, the current inequalities 
in access to food may exacerbate the 
growing tensions between vulnerable 
groups. 
LACK OF ADEQUATE 
HEALTH SERVICES CAN 
LEAD TO LOSS OF LIVES 
Without continued life-saving support 
from humanitarian organizations in the 
health sector, over 900,000 people in 
Myanmar will be at serious risk, with 
consequences for communities at every 
level. Without primary health care, 
children will be at risk of contracting 
vaccine preventable diseases. Common 
ailments left untreated may progress 
to morbidity and mortality. Women 
with no access to reproductive health 
care are at far greater risk of further 
complications. 
INADEQUATE SHELTER 
EXPOSES FAMILIES TO 
MULTIPLE RISKS 
Without support from shelter actors, 
displaced people, including children, 
elderly and persons with disabilities 
will be exposed to undignified living 
conditions and serious protection 
risks. Many temporary shelters have 
reached the end of their lifespan with 
many more deteriorating due to lack of 
funding for renovation and maintenance, 
leaving people in sub-standard shelter. 
Meanwhile, the lack of additional space 
results in serious overcrowding, health 
and protection risks, an issue that 
requires strong advocacy. Increased 
support is critical to respond to new 
needs and reduce displaced communities’ 
exposure to health and protection risks. 
CRISIS AFFECTED PEOPLE 
WILL BE EXPOSED TO 
SERIOUS PROTECTION RISKS 
In Kachin and northern Shan, armed 
conflict, displacement, landmine 
contamination and non-respect of 
international humanitarian law cause 
serious protection risks, including 
gender-based violence and grave 
violations against children. In Rakhine, 
prolonged displacement, discriminatory 
policies and practices, restrictions on 
freedom of movement that impedes 
access to livelihoods and basic services 
result in severe risks compounded by 
high levels of psychological distress and 
negative coping mechanisms. Increased 
support to protection activities is vital 
to prevent, mitigate and respond to 
protection violations. 
This document was prepared by the Myanmar Humanitarian Country Team (United Nations and Partners). It provides the Humanitarian Country 
Team’s shared understanding of the crisis, including the most pressing humanitarian needs, and reflects its joint humanitarian response planning. 
The designation employed and the presentation of material in this report do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part 
of the Humanitarian Country Team concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the 
delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. 
www.unocha.org/myanmar www.facebook.com/OCHAMyanmar 
MORE CHILDREN WILL 
MISS OUT ON QUALITY 
EDUCATION 
Education remains a priority 
component of the humanitarian 
response plan in Myanmar. Without 
funding allocated to education, over 
135,000 children and adolescents will 
be at greater risk of being exposed 
to trafficking, risky migration or 
exploitation. In a context like Myanmar, 
Education is one of the sectors with 
the highest potential to contribute to 
supporting the long-term processes 
of rebuilding and peace-building. 
This is why an increased investment 
in Education has the potential to 
be ground breaking for longer term 
solutions to the crisis affecting 
Myanmar. 

