REGIONAL 
STRATEGIC 
OVERVIEW 
2019/2020 
NOTE: The figures and information contained in this 
document are in draft form and subject to amendment as 
the 3RP country chapters are finalized.

SYRIA 
CRISIS 
TIMELINE 
Since its inception in 2015, the Regional Refugee and Resilience Plan (3RP) for the Syria crisis has been at the forefront 
of responding to the impact of the crisis in the five main countries in the region hosting refugees from Syria. Over 270 
humanitarian and development partners have come together within this framework to address the challenges facing 5.6 
million refugees and 3.9 million vulnerable members of host communities, in support of national efforts. 
The five neighboring countries have remained incredibly generous in hosting and addressing the needs of large refugee 
populations since the start of the crisis - offering asylum and protection, making their public services available to refugees, and 
enabling more and more refugees to participate in the local economy – despite the toll it has taken on their own development 
trajectory. 
3RP partners have made significant and concrete impact in support of national efforts. They continue to be at the cutting 
edge of programme and policy innovation - from biometric registration and common cash systems, to livelihoods and 
resilience-strengthening approaches, to social cohesion and tension reduction interventions and working with and through 
municipalities and local organizations. 3RP partners have set a strong example globally in achieving results and synergies 
around the humanitarian-development nexus. 
Some one million Syrian children have been borne in the neighboring host countries over the last few years. Despite the 
generosity of host countries and communities, and the international community, these children are largely born into a 
situation where poverty rates are high, protection challenges such as early marriage and child labour are not uncommon, and 
an education is not always guaranteed. Host community members – who have welcomed Syrian refugees so graciously – face 
their own set of challenges, including related to poverty, unemployment and access to quality services. 
For 2019, 3RP partners have laid out a USD$5.5 billion comprehensive plan in each of the five countries to build on progress 
in helping to address these challenges. This Regional Strategic Overview presents the totality of these efforts across the 
countries, based on the eight regional strategic directions. Such support will include, for example, helping to address on-going 
protection challenges for refugees; providing more educational opportunities for children and young people; building and 
deepening resilience capacities, enhancing economic opportunities especially for women; and leveraging the expertise of 3RP 
partners to increasing the ability of national and local partners. 
While refugees from Syria will continue to require protection and assistance in host countries in 2019, the protracted nature of 
the crisis means that more durable solutions are urgently needed so they can look to the future with hope and dignity. 
The protracted nature of the crisis also means that we need to redouble our efforts to restore the development momentum of 
host countries who have responded generously since the start of the crisis. Strong support from bilateral partners, International 
Financial Institutions and the private sector will continue to be critical in that regard. 
It is thanks to the generosity of our donors and supporters that 3RP partners continue to make a real difference to the lives of 
so many people. Against the backdrop of pivotal political, economic and social developments in Syria and across the region, 
we urge you to continue to engage and support the 3RP as we work together to enhance the quality, efficiency, and impact of 
our support to those in need until voluntary return, in safety and dignity takes place. 
FOREWORD 
Amin Awad 
UNHCR Director for the Middle East and North Africa Bureau 
and Regional Refugee Coordinator for the Syria and 
Iraq situations 
Mourad Wahba 
Assistant Secretary-General of the United Nations, 
Assistant Administrator of UNDP and Director 
of the UNDP Regional Bureau for Arab States

2 Regional Strategic Overview 3 
Regional Refugee & Resilience Plan (3RP) 2019-2020 
Regional Strategic Overview 
Regional Refugee & Resilience Plan (3RP) 2019-2020 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Table of Contents 
Response Summary 
Situation Overview 
Strategic Directions 
Introduction 
Strong National Leadership 
Regional Protection Framework 
Strengthening and Deepening 
the Resilience Approach 
Enhancing Economic Opportunities 
No Lost Generation 
Continued Outreach and Partnerships 
Enhanced Accountability Mechanisms 
Durable Solutions for Syrian Refugees 
Assessments & Evaluation 
Sector Response 
Sector Overview 
Protection Sector 
Food Sector 
Education Sector 
Health and Nutrition Sector 
Basic needs Sector 
Shelter Sector 
WASH Sector 
Livelihoods Sector 
3RP Appealing Partners 
3 |
4 | 
6 | 
8 | 
20 | 
32 | 
22 | 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
14 
13 
15 
16 
24 
22 
25 
26 
28 
27 
29 
30 
31

POPULATION FINANCIAL REQUIREMENTS 
RESPONSE SUMMARY 2019-2020 RESPONSE SUMMARY 2019-2020 
Some one million 
Syrian refugee babies born in 
neighboring countries. 
KEY FIGURES AND FACTS 
REGIONAL SECTOR REQUIREMENT BREAKDOWN 
70 % 
of people in need in the region 
are women or children. 
Turkey hosts the highest number of 
Syrian refugees in the world, while 
Lebanon and Jordan have among the 
highest concentration of refugees per 
capita in the world. 
85 % 
of registered Syrian refugees in 
Egypt are unable to meet their 
basic needs. 
2015 2016 2017 2018* 
REFUGEE & RESILIENCE COMPONENT 
FUNDING RECEIVED (end-year)* 
USD 
486 m 
39 % 
USD 
2.18 b 
71 % 
USD 
2.22 b 
79 % 
USD 
2.21 b 
67 % 
USD 
2.3 b 
65 % 
USD 
659 m 
38 % 
USD 
1.2 b 
53 % USD 
581 m 
29 % 
FOOD SECURITY 
SECTOR 
USD 
697 m 
TOTAL 
WASH 
SECTOR 
USD 
271 m 
TOTAL 
SHELTER 
SECTOR 
USD 
142 m 
TOTAL 
BASIC NEEDS 
SECTOR 
USD 
1.5 b 
TOTAL 
EDUCATION 
SECTOR 
USD 
979 m 
TOTAL 
PROTECTION 
SECTOR 
USD 
713 m 
TOTAL 
LIVELIHOODS 
SECTOR 
USD 
685 m 
TOTAL 
HEALTH 
SECTOR 
USD 
336 m 
TOTAL 
REFUGEE 
$ 126,482,343 
$ 191,732,273 
$ 684,560,524 
$ 1,008,347,977 
$ 1,063,267,266 
$ 130,835,257 
$ 3,205,225,641 
ESTIMATED 
TOTAL NEEDS 
2020 
$ 171,365,093 
$ 264,185,912 
TBC 
TBC 
$ 1,557,376,520 
TBC 
TBC 
NOTE: The “Total requirements 2019” figure does not 
include the requirements of the government under 
the JRP, LCRP and other national responses. 
All figures are in USD. 
TOTAL REQUIREMENTS OF THE 3RP IN 2019 
TOTAL 
REQUIREMENTS 
2019 * 
$ 162,093,315 
$ 272,281,510 
$ 1,067,444,982 
$ 2,240,773,283 
$ 1,652,704,157 
$ 138,840,757 
$ 5,534,138,004 
* All figures subject to change pending finalization/ 
release/launch of the 3RP country chapters. 
** Jordan figures are pending review by the 
Government of Jordan and therefore may be 
subject to change in due course. 
700,000 
children out of school 
across the region. 
Refugee Component Resilience Component 
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 
61 
% 
63 
% 
62 
% 
61 
% 
71 
% 
APPEAL VS FUNDING IN PREVIOUS YEARS 
(end-year)* 
USD 
2.98 b 
required 
USD 
3.74 b 
required 
USD 
4.32 b 
required 
USD 
4.54 b 
required 
USD 
5.58 b 
required 
NOTE: This graphic covers funding under the 3RP 
since 2015 and its predecessors, the Refugee 
Response Plans (RRPs), since 2012. 
NOTE: The percentages of 
component funded against 
component requirements 
2012 
USD 
488 m 
required 
USD 
5.61 b 
required 
2018 * 
52 
% 
* 2018 figures as 
of September 2018 
* 2018 figures as 
of September 2018 
77 % 
TOTAL 
REQUIREMENTS 
2019 
USD 5.5 billion 
required 
Refugee Component 
USD 3.2 billion (58 %) 
Resilience Component 
USD 2.3billion (42 %) 
NOTE: This does not include regional funding requirements and some other 
country-level requirements which have not yet been allocated a sector. 
In Jordan, 57 % of working age 
Syrian refugees are unemployed and 
of Syrian refugees outside of camps 
8 0 % are below the poverty line. 
Only 13 % of Lebanese Households 
registered with the National Poverty Targeting 
Programme (NPTP) have access to full time 
employment (MoSA NPTP database). 
93 % of Syrian refugees across the 
region reside within the host community, 
mainly in urban areas; 7% reside in camps. 
the designations used on this map do not imply official endorsement or acceptance by the United Nations. 
[ 
Legend 
UNDOF Administered Area 
Admin1_6_C_07022017 
National Capital 
200 km 
EGYPT
registered Syrian refugees 
estimated total number of Syrians 
projected registered Syrian refugees by December 2019 
directly targeted members of impacted communities in 2019 
132,553 
500,000 
144,000 
506,000 
LEBANON 
registered Syrian refugees 
estimated total number of Syrians 
projected registered Syrian refugees by December 2019 
directly targeted members of impacted communities in 2019 
951,629 
1,500,000 
942,337 
1,005,000 
TURKEY
registered Syrian refugees 
estimated total number of Syrians 
projected registered Syrian refugees by December 2019 
directly targeted members of impacted communities in 2019 
3,613,961 
3,613,961 
3,600,000 
1,800,000 
IRAQ 
registered Syrian refugees 
estimated total number of Syrians 
projected registered Syrian refugees by December 2019 
directly targeted members of impacted communities in 2019 
251,793 
251,793 
240,000 
158,110 
JORDAN
registered Syrian refugees 
estimated total number of Syrians 
projected registered Syrian refugees by December 2019 
directly targeted members of impacted communities in 2019 
673,414 
1,380,000 
602,000 
520,000 
TOTAL 5,656,895 
registered Syrian refugees 
as of December 2018 
5,528,337 
projected registered Syrian 
refugees by December 2019 
7,245,754 
estimated total # of Syrians 
as of December 2018 
3,989,110 
directly targeted members of 
impacted communities in 2019 
Regional total of 5,656,895 registered Syrian refugees on 1 December 2018, including 33,545 Syrian refugees accommodated in countries 
in North Africa | Total estimated number of Syrians of 7,245,754 represents Government estimates, including registered Syrian refugees, 
unregistered Syrian refugees and Syrians residing in host countries under alternative legal frameworks | Projected registered Syrian 
refugees end 2019 comprises 3RP planning figure of 5,528,337 representing the expected registered refugee population in the respective 
countries by 31 December 2019, as well as 33,545 Syrian refugees in countries in North Africa | Directly targeted members of impacted 
communities represents the members of impacted host communities who will be directly targeted for assistance under the 3RP | These 
figures do not include the 180,000 Palestine refugees in Lebanon and 28,800 Palestine refugees from Syria targeted in the LCRP. 
COUNTRY 
Egypt 
Iraq 
Jordan ** 
Lebanon 
Turkey 
Regional 
TOTAL 
RESILIENCE 
$ 35,610,972 
$ 80,549,237 
$ 382,884,458 
$ 1,232,425,305 
$ 589,436,891 
$ 8,005,500 
$ 2,328,912,363

6 Regional Strategic Overview 7 
Regional Refugee & Resilience Plan (3RP) 2019-2020 
Regional Strategic Overview 
Regional Refugee & Resilience Plan (3RP) 2019-2020 
The Syria crisis remains the largest 
displacement crisis in the world, with over 
5.6 million registered refugees and over six 
million people displaced within Syria. The 
situation evolved inside Syria during 2018. 
Large-scale fighting concluded in many parts 
of the country enabling some 1.2 million 
internally displaced people to return to their 
area of origin in the first ten months of 2018. 
Conversely, the security situation in other areas 
remained challenging, with large-scale internal 
displacement being reported throughout 2018. 
Across the country, access to basic services 
and socio-economic opportunities remained 
challenging, particularly in areas recovering 
from the impact of fighting. 
Turkey, Lebanon, Jordan, Iraq and Egypt 
hosted 5.6 million registered Syrian refugees 
as of 1 December 2018. There was no largescale 
arrival of refugees into neighboring 
countries over the course of 2018 as borders 
and admission practices remained closely 
managed. At the same time, none of these 
countries saw a substantial decrease in the 
registered Syrian refugee population, while 
some witnessed net increases as a result of 
various factors, such as new-borns and new 
registrations, including some new arrivals. 
The issue of refugee return gained increasing 
attention in 2018 following developments 
inside Syria and across the region. As of 30 
November, UNHCR recorded some 42,728 
spontaneous refugee returns in 2018. These 
figures are based on government sources 
and direct observation by UNHCR. The actual 
number of returns may be significantly higher. 
These return movements occurred in a selforganized 
manner or with host government 
engagement in some countries. 3RP partner 
activities in respect of such spontaneous return 
movements included monitoring, counselling, 
assessments of the voluntary nature of return, 
Abu Mohammed is a small-scale farmer based 
in the Bekaa Valley in Lebanon. Here he is 
photographed in the land he rents out to grow 
his vegetables. 
SITUATION 
OVERVIEW 
However, despite their efforts, the conditions 
of refugee families across the region remains 
challenging. The welfare profile of Syrian 
refugees has not changed significantly over the 
past year, with current estimates for poverty 
rates continuing to exceed 60 per cent in 
some host countries. Poverty for refugees also 
manifests itself as low educational attainment, 
subpar health and nutrition outcomes, 
exposure to physical insecurity and natural 
hazards, and substandard living conditions. 
For instance, some 35 per cent of Syrian 
refugee children (5-17 years) still remain out-ofschool 
across the region. Meanwhile, Palestine 
refugees affected by the Syrian crisis continue 
to face particular vulnerabilities. 
The impact of the crisis on vulnerable girls, 
boys, women and men’s protection and socioeconomic 
well-being is profound and will 
likely have long-term effects. As more refugees 
remain iunable to meet their basic needs, 
protection risks such as early marriage, sexual 
and gender-based violence, child labour, 
indebtedness and exploitation may worsen. 
Childhood poverty in refugee populations is 
particularly damaging because it has been 
shown to contribute to intergenerational 
poverty. 
While recent economic developments and 
outlook for countries across the region 
hosting the majority of refugees are somewhat 
contrasted, most have recorded persistently 
weak growth that has left per capita incomes 
near stagnant since 2008. While economic 
growth in countries in the sub-region was not 
high prior to the Syria crisis, this has been 
exacerbated by the effects of the crisis and 
growth is expected to remain relatively sluggish 
as a result of ongoing regional uncertainty, 
slowdown in economic activity, global 
monetary conditions and other economic 
pressures. 
Host countries continue to face a range 
of related political, economic, and social 
challenges, including ensuring basic 
service provision and stimulating economic 
opportunity. Unemployment continues to 
hover above 10 percent in most economies and 
was estimated at over 18 percent in Jordan in 
2017. The recently published 2018 Arab Youth 
Survey also revealed that 31 per cent of youth 
in the Levant countries (Jordan, Lebanon, and 
Iraq) identify creating new and well-paying jobs 
as the top policy priority for their countries to 
move in the right direction. 
While the levels of social tension between 
refugees and host communties have remained 
relatively stable on a macro level across 
the region, the combined effects of these 
socio-economic conditions can lead to 
increased fatigue among host communities 
in some countries. This is despite the fact that 
assessments have pointed to the positive 
impact of refugees can have on the local 
economy and other spheres of life. 
Against this backdrop, 3RP partners worked to 
address the protection and assistance needs 
of refugees and vulnerable host communities 
in 2018. This includes: the enrolment of over 
1.2 million children aged 5 to 17 in formal 
education; the provision of support to over 
50,000 individuals to access employment 
(training, internships, job placement and 
language courses); the provision of food 
assistance to over 2.3 million people; the 
engagement of almost 800,000 individuals 
in community-led initiatives; and, the 
disbursement of emergency cash assistance 
to over 450,000 households, giving them 
the choice and dignity to spend the money 
according to their most pressing needs. In 
addition, 3RP partners continue to work with 
host governments on the issue of work permits, 
in furtherance of the outcomes of the London 
conference in 2016. 
The funding environment for the 3RP continues 
to be challenging amidst varied global and 
national economic challenges. Nonetheless, 
donors remain generous, with the total funding 
provided by donors to the 3RP in 2018 recorded 
at some USD 2.9 billion as of 30 September (52 
per cent of requirements). Over USD 12 billion 
has been channeled through the 3RP since 
2015. Outside the 3RP pledges, bilateral and 
multi-lateral donors have provided substantial 
support in the form of grants and loans to 
Turkey, Lebanon, Jordan, Iraq, and Egypt in 
2018. In addition 3RP partners are grateful 
for donors enabling the carry-over of funds 
received in 2018 to be used towards 2019. 
and support with civil status documentation. 
Such engagement was guided by UNHCR’s 
Comprehensive Protection and Solutions 
Strategy: Protection Thresholds and Parameters 
for Refugee Return to Syria (CPSS), released in 
February 2018. 
Return intention surveys conducted in 2018 
found that 76 per cent of Syrian refugees hoped 
to return to Syria one day. However, 85 per 
cent of respondents stated they do not have 
the intention to return in the next 12 months. 
Respondents across the region indicated 
that the main issues affecting their decision 
to return relate to physical risks, availability 
of essential services, including access to 
education, livelihood and job opportunities, 
conscription, and fear of punishment for having 
fled or refused to fight. Legal obstacles and 
challenges in reclaiming property or having 
access to civil status documentation were also 
highlighted as key issues. 
Resettlement remained an important but 
relatively limited option throughout 2018. 
Some 23,000 refugees were submitted for 
resettlement in the first ten months of 2018, 
even though the number of vulnerable refugees 
who meet the resettlement criteria is much 
higher, at around 10 per cent of the total Syrian 
refugee population. Resettlement is likely to 
remain a limited option, particularly as the 
number of a resettlement places for Syrians is 
decreasing compared to previous years. 
Given the current dynamics, it is projected 
that the registered Syrian refugee population 
in Turkey, Lebanon, Jordan, Iraq and Egypt 
will remain high throughout 2019, in line with 
current figures. This will mean that the primary 
burden for the situation will continue to fall 
primarily on host countries and communities 
who have generously opened their countries for 
many years now. 
As of 30 November, 
UNHCR has recorded 
42,728 
self-spontaneous 
returns so far in 
2018 
ECONOMIC GROW RATE 
IN THE HOST COUNTRIES IN 2018 
Lebanon Jordan Iraq Turkey 
+1 % +2.1 % +1.9 % +3.7 % 
43,285 
work permits issued to 
Syrians under temporary 
protection in Turkey 
since 2016 
122,224 
work permits issued 
to Syrian refugees 
in Jordan since 2016 
Return intention surveys 
conducted in 2018 
have found that 
85 % 
of Syrian refugees 
do not intend to return 
in the next 12 months

INTRODUCTION 
The 3RP offers a strategic, coordination, planning, advocacy, and 
programming platform for humanitarian and development partners 
to respond to the Syria crisis at the regional level and in host countries. 
While strategy, planning and programming are country-led processes, 
regional coherence is pursued to ensure consistency in response 
planning and implementation, to promote common tools, standards and 
innovation, and to enhance advocacy efforts at global and regional levels. 
The 3RP comprises one regional plan, with five standalone country 
chapters. Eight regional strategic directions provide the high-level 
parameters for the response. Taken together, the strategic directions are 
designed to collectively enhance the protection of vulnerable persons 
affected by the crisis, create the conditions and opportunities for 
dignified lives, build the resilience of refugees and host communities, and 
strengthen the capacities of national authorities and responders. 
In terms of programming, the 3RP is conceptualized as having two interconnected 
components that inform the overall response. The refugee 
component addresses the protection and humanitarian assistance needs 
of refugees living in camps, settlements and local communities. The 3RP 
resilience component addresses primarily the resilience, stabilization and 
development needs of impacted and vulnerable communities and aims 
to strengthen the capacities of national actors to lead the crisis response. 
As an integrated humanitarian and development plan, the 3RP is co-led 
overall by UNHCR and UNDP, who take the primary responsibility for the 
leadership and coordination of the refugee and resilience component 
respectively. 3RP partners bring their expertise to bear across the various 
sectors, including as sector leads or co-leads according to the various 
country modalities. 
2019-2020 
STRATEGIC 
DIRECTIONS 
The foundation of the 3RP response model remains strong national 
leadership, with national actors as the principal responders, supported 
by UN Agencies, international and national NGOs, and other partners. 
It is for this reason that the 3RP is made up of five country chapters, 
which are nationally-led in design and implementation. While the exact 
modalities of identifying national priorities, planning, coordination, and 
response vary by country, the 3RP and its partners use every opportunity 
to place national leadership and capacities at the forefront of the 
response. 
3RP STRUCTURE AT REGIONAL / NATIONAL LEVEL 
Turkey 
In accordance with Turkey’s 
comprehensive legal framework for 
international and temporary protection, 
registration and verification by the 
Directorate General for Migration 
Management (DGMM) provides access 
to public services for Syrians and the 
respective government authorities lead 
in the provision of these services. 
Egypt 
3RP Partners work closely with their 
counterpart line ministries to ensure the 
response is complimentary and aligned 
with national efforts. For 2019, the 
Government of Egypt included financial 
requirements as part of the protection, 
health and education sectors. 
Jordan 
The Government, through the Ministry of 
Planning and International Cooperation 
(MOPIC), remains the driver of the 
Jordan Response Plan (JRP), which is 
closely linked to national priorities. A 
Secretariat housed in MOPIC ensures 
overall coordination of the response. UN 
Agencies and NGO partners support the 
government’s efforts. 
The boundaries and names shown and the designations used on this map do not imply official endorsement or acceptance by the United Nations. 
[ 
Legend 
Boundary of former Palestine Mandate 
International Boundary 
UNDOF Administered Area 
Armistice Demarcation Line 
Admin1_6_C_07022017 
National Capital 
200 km 
The boundaries and names shown and the designations used on this map do not imply official endorsement or acceptance by the United Nations. 
[ 
Legend 
Boundary of former Palestine Mandate 
International Boundary 
UNDOF Administered Area 
Armistice Demarcation Line 
Admin1_6_C_07022017 
National Capital 
200 km 
The boundaries and names shown and the designations used on this map do not imply official endorsement or acceptance by the United Nations. 
[ 
Legend 
Boundary of former Palestine Mandate 
International Boundary 
UNDOF Administered Area 
Armistice Demarcation Line 
Admin1_6_C_07022017 
National Capital 
200 km 
NATIONALLY-LED PLANS ENSURE: 
• Alignment with national priorities, both 
short-term and long-term 
• Streamlined coordination structures 
• Capacity strengthening of national institutions 
• Sustainability of interventions 
STRONG NATIONAL 
LEADERSHIP 
1. 
Lebanon 
The Lebanon Crisis Response Plan is 
developed by a national steering body 
convened by the Minister of Social Affairs 
and the UN Resident and Humanitarian 
Coordinator (RC/HC) under the overall 
guidance of the Government’s Inter- 
Ministerial Committee on Displaced. Line 
Ministries lead each of the ten sectors, 
with the support of the UN coordinating 
agencies, ensuring linkages with 
national plans and priorities. 
The boundaries and names shown and the designations used on this map do not imply official endorsement or acceptance by the United Nations. 
[ 
Legend 
Boundary of former Palestine Mandate 
International Boundary 
UNDOF Administered Area 
Armistice Demarcation Line 
Admin1_6_C_07022017 
National Capital 
200 km 
Iraq 
The response is implemented under the 
overall leadership of the Government 
of Iraq and the Kurdistan Regional 
Government (KRG), particularly the 
Ministry of Planning. Local government 
plays an important role in the dayto-
day coordination of the response, 
particularly in camp settings. 
The boundaries and names shown and the designations used on this map do not imply official endorsement or acceptance by the United Nations. 
[ 
Legend 
Boundary of former Palestine Mandate 
International Boundary 
UNDOF Administered Area 
Armistice Demarcation Line 
Admin1_6_C_07022017 
National Capital 
200 km 
Strategic Direction 

10 Regional Strategic Overview 11 
Regional Refugee & Resilience Plan (3RP) 2019-2020 
Regional Strategic Overview 
Regional Refugee & Resilience Plan (3RP) 2019-2020 
Multi-year funding 
Financial predictability strengthens resilience programming as partners 
are able to plan better and establish more strategic and longer-term 
partnerships with local responders. In addition, multi-year funding 
facilitates a more coherent transition from emergency to recovery/ 
development. Based on the Brussels II conference fundraising report, 
22 donors have presented multi-year funding plans (2019-2020) totalling 
US$3.3 billion to the 3RP countries. As of July 2018, 3RP countries have 
received US$818 million in multi-year (or 25 % of pledged amounts), as 
shown in the table below. 
Linking to Development Agenda 
Alignment of 3RP objectives with national priorities and plans is already 
a key feature of the response in some countries, such as Jordan, Turkey 
and Lebanon. Host countries have indicated – through the partnership 
papers presented in Brussels II (Lebanon, Jordan) – that there is a 
need to better align the transition from humanitarian to development 
outcomes’while not losing sight of the continued need for support for 
refugees and host communities’ needs. in that regard, some 3RP country 
plans are also factoring in the consequences of climate change, lack of 
sustainable water and energy resources, food and agricultural production 
and other environmental factors into their response models. In 2019, the 
3RP plans to further explore the intersections between humanitarian 
and development processes, including with ongoing current global 
processes, such as the UN Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), the 
UN 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, and the Comprehensive 
Refugee Response Framework (CRRF)/Global Compact on Refugees. 
Resilience is defined as the ability of individuals, households, 
communities and institutions to anticipate, withstand, recover and 
transform from shocks and crises, natural or man-made. A resiliencebased 
response to a protracted crisis demands that stakeholders do 
things differently, including for humanitarian and development agencies 
to work together within an integrated response and for donors to 
establish multi-year financing to promote predictable responses. 
3RP resilience programming has expanded in recent years. This is 
reflected in the funding requirement for the resilience component: 
an increase from 28 per cent of the total appeal in 2015 to 41 per cent 
in 2018. This increase reflects the growing importance of resilience 
programming among partners. For example, support to education, health 
and social services is increasingly moving from direct service delivery to 
strengthening national capacities/systems with the skills and knowledge 
required to respond to a crisis, and to anticipate and mitigate future 
crises while improving the quality of service. 
Funding received for the resilience component has also increased 
from US$486 million in 2015 to US$822 million in 2017. This significant 
increase reflects the needs as well as the commitment of partners and 
donors to support resilience among refugees, host communities and local 
and national institutions. However, the resilience component remains 
critically underfunded in terms of the overall appeal. 
Localisation 
Local institutions and municipalities are the first level responders to 
provide services for refugees and host communities and thus play a 
key role in preserving social cohesion. Given these critical functions, 
enhancing the capacity of impacted municipalities in terms of technical 
skills and human and financial resources is a key aspect of the response. 
3RP partners are providing technical support to strengthen public 
institutions at local and national level to adapt and transform their 
response and management practices. 
As the Syria crisis enters its eighth year, neighbouring countries have 
continued their generous hospitality for refugees. However, with border 
and admission practices remaining closely managed in several countries, 
many persons fleeing Syria face challenges to access safety and asylum 
and receive the protection and assistance they need. 3RP partners 
advocate for access to territory and freedom of movement, allowing for 
Syrian refugees to reach safety and to be re-united with family members 
already in host countries. 
Many refugee households are contending with increasing socioeconomic 
vulnerabilities and resort to negative coping mechanisms, 
exacerbating the risks of sexual and gender-based violence (SGBV) and 
child labour, among others. The risk of SGBV persists and may even 
increase due to prolonged family separation, breakdown of community 
structures existing prior to the conflict, loss of financial and social 
assets, or overcrowded housing lacking privacy. Females face additional 
burdens including increased economic insecurity, severely limited work 
opportunities, and challenges in accessing assistance, such as mental 
health and psycho-social support, all of which have a significant impact 
on overall health and well-being. 
In 2019, the 3RP aims to ensure that refugees’ protection needs are 
identified and addressed, including by ensuring age, gender and 
diversity inclusion in programming across all sectors to address these 
risks and help to realize durable solutions. This includes the integration 
and application of community-based protection for people-centric 
interventions and community empowerment initiatives. 3RP partners 
continue to work with host countries and partners to ensure that refugee 
children and youth can exercise their right to education. 
Data collection and analysis continue to provide the necessary evidence 
for protection programming to target those most at risk, to expand 
multi-sectoral responses to address the full spectrum of refugees’ needs 
and strengthen the capacity of national systems to enhance access to 
essential services. given the protracted nature of the crisis, increasing 
attention is being paid to updating civil status documentation and 
prevention of statelessness, as highlighted in the box. 
STRENGTHENING AND DEEPENING 
THE RESILIENCE APPROACH 
REGIONAL PROTECTION 
FRAMEWORK 
COMBATTING STATELESSNESS 
3RP partners continue to increase access to civil status 
documentation, which helps to prevent statelessness. These 
efforts are grounded in the realization that gaps in civil status 
and identity documentation, coupled with family separation, 
can leave forcibly displaced individuals and particularly 
children at risk of statelessness and also the recognition that, 
once statelessness occurs, it is often a complex issue to resolve. 
Refugee children who lack birth certificates also face immediate 
protection risks, including inability to access healthcare, 
education, and family unity. In response, the joint efforts of 
3RP partners have significantly reduced the percentage of 
Syrian children born in the region without any form of identity 
documents from approximately 35 per cent in 2012 to 2.5 per 
cent in 2017. UNHCR has partnered with the League of Arab 
States (LAS) under the shared objective of achieving universal 
birth registration in the region. In 2018, these efforts culminated 
in the adoption of the LAS Declaration on Belonging and Legal 
Identity, which reaffirms the commitment of all LAS member 
States to ensure all children in the region are registered at birth 
and have a legal identity, while also calling for equal nationality 
rights for women and men in all LAS member States. 
RESILIENCE: APPLICATION OF ASSETS AND CAPACITIES 
In the face 
of shocks 
and stresses 
at the level 
ABSORB 
ADAPT 
TRANSFORM 
COMMUNITY 
INSTITUTIONAL 
Resettlement / humanitarian admission 
Specialized child protection services 
Sexual and Gender-Based Violence (SGBV) response services 
Child protection and psychosocial support programmes 
Empowerment opportunities Outreach activities 
Parenting programmes 
Community-led initiatives 
Training on protection including child protection and SGBV 
Awareness raising or information campaigns 
Legal assistance 
INTERLINKED PROTECTION SERVICES 
Jordan 
received 
USD 280 m 
Lebanon 
received 
USD 123 m Turkey 
received 
USD 46 m 
Iraq 
received 
USD 79 m 
INDIVIDUAL 
2. 3. 
Strategic Direction Strategic Direction 

12 Regional Strategic Overview 13 
Regional Refugee & Resilience Plan (3RP) 2019-2020 
Regional Strategic Overview 
Regional Refugee & Resilience Plan (3RP) 2019-2020 
3RP partners remain focused on creating economic opportunities for 
Syrian refugees and host communities in the region, building on the 
commitments first made by Governments and donors – at scale – at the 
London conference in 2016 and reiterated at the Brussels II conference in 
April 2018. 
Providing sufficient economic opportunities had been a challenge facing 
the region even before the Syria crisis. Currently, host countries face 
added challenges associated with absorbing large numbers of refugees 
into their economies given limited trade, investment, and opportunities 
for economic growth, as well as high levels of unemployment and 
under-employment, as well as other country- specific conditions 
that limit refugees’ access to economic opportunities. Consequently, 
unemployment rates across the region amongst refugees and host 
community members remain relatively high. Also important is the lack of 
employment opportunities for youth which is nearly three times higher 
than that of overall population since the crisis began. 
ENHANCING ECONOMIC 
OPPORTUNITIES 
Country-specific Challenges Facing Refugees in Accessing Economic Opportunities 
- Residency permits - Residency card 
- Mobility 
- Government capacity 
- Security 
- Access to credit 
- Legal uncertainty 
- Mobility 
- Closed jobs and quotas 
- Negative perception 
- Residency permits 
- Mobility 
- Closed jobs and quotas 
- Negative perception 
- Language 
- Negative perception 
- Mobility 
EGYPT IRAQ (KRI) JORDAN LEBANON TURKEY 
3RP PARTNERS ENHANCE ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITIES 
FOR SYRIAN REFUGEES AND HOST COMMUNITIES 
THROUGH 
3RP partners - along with donors, International Financial Institutions 
and bilateral partners - are implementing a range of livelihood projects 
in order to boost the efforts made by the host governments. The 
interventions are aimed at 1) regulatory improvements to work permits 
for increased refugee access to employment; 2) improving existing labour 
market conditions through information or skill upgrades; 3) improving 
the overall business climate and access to finance (including refugee 
entrepreneurs) to foster more entrepreneurship; and 4) expanding 
knowledge and research jointly - such as the UNHCR-UNDP Joint 
Secretariat - through filling knowledge gaps and exploring ways to 
improve programming and policy in the response. 
3RP partners will continue working collaboratively through inclusive and 
comprehensive engagement with the host government and donors to 
strengthen and achieve the commitments to economic empowerment 
(including for women) and look to processes such as the Bonn Expert 
Meetings on Creating Jobs and Economic Opportunities and the 
outcomes of the Regional Development and Protection Programme 
(RDPP) Policy Options consultations to increase international solidarity 
in achieving the economic growth and job creation potential of host 
countries. 
STRENGTHENING THE RESILIENCE 
OF SYRIAN WOMEN AND GIRLS 
UN Women’s programme “Strengthening the Resilience of 
Syrian Women and Girls and Host Communities in Iraq, Jordan 
and Turkey” is aimed at strengthening the resilience of affected 
Syrian women in refugee camps and host communities. The 
programme uses a two-pronged approach by: 1) enabling 
women’s economic empowerment through increased access to 
livelihoods opportunities, comprehensive protection services, 
and engaging men as advocates for women’s participation in the 
market; and, 2) promoting a culture of peace and co-existence 
by supporting women in peacebuilding, reconciliation, conflict 
prevention and rights protection. 
• Outreach programs providing peer-to-peer and networking platforms 
to entrepreneurs 
• Empowering entrepreneurs to scale up 
• Providing equipment, livelihood counselling, skills training, 
and information on employment 
• Skills development to increase equal employment opportunities 
for youth and women 
• Training to judiciary and legal professionals on fair and 
effective governance, labour rights, and work permit regulations 
• Promoting social cohesion between refugees and local communities 
The No Lost Generation (NLG) initiative is a commitment to action that 
brings together key partners, including humanitarians, donors and 
policy-makers to achieve agreed outcomes essential for the education, 
protection, wellbeing and future of children and young people affected 
by the Syria and Iraq crises. 
At the regional level, NLG partners advocate jointly on the priorities for 
children and youth, amplifying the voices and perspectives of the younger 
generation affected by the conflict. Regular updates are shared on results 
and funding levels under three pillars: Education, Child Protection, and 
Adolescents & Youth, along with key policy changes required to secure 
positive results for children and young people in 3RP countries. 
Syrian children and youth, along with the children in host communities, 
still face major constraints in accessing education at all levels. In this 
area, programming in the 3RP is aligned with the recommendations 
of the Brussels II Conference and aims to ensure access to sustainable, 
relevant and quality education opportunities at all levels through support 
to flexible learning strategies and multiple pathways, strengthening 
national inclusive education systems and improved multi-sectoral 
responses – including protection. 
NLG child protection partners will focus on strengthening national 
and local child protection systems, as well as providing immediate and 
coordinated services to the most vulnerable children, adolescents and 
youth. An integrated framework to address child labour will continue 
to guide multi-sector efforts in this area, and an interagency regional 
accountability framework developed in 2018 will coordinate efforts 
to mitigate the risk and effects of child marriage. Recognising that the 
protection issues which affect children continue, and even intensify, as 
they move through late adolescence and beyond, NLG partners will also 
focus on mitigating and responding to these risks among youth. 
NLG partners will continue and strengthen efforts to provide positive 
engagement opportunities to adolescents and youth, empowering 
them to achieve change as leaders and problem-solvers in their own 
communities and to contribute to resilience and social cohesion. A newly 
established Adolescent and Youth Hub will be used to grow and promote 
the evidence base on what works for young people affected by the crises 
in Syria and Iraq and a regional Adolescent and Youth Advisory Majlis 
will facilitate ongoing consultation with young people from different 
backgrounds to inform programming and advocacy. 
USING TECH FOR EDUCATION 
The No Lost Generation Tech Task Force was set up by NetHope 
in March 2017 to facilitate collaboration between experts among 
70 humanitarian and private sector organizations. One such 
project is the Hakeem chatbot, which is being incubated by 
Microsoft, the Norwegian Refugee Council and University College 
Dublin. Hakeem is a virtual learning companion designed to 
simplify access to educational and skills-training content using 
Artificial Intelligence (AI). The chatbot uses a conversational 
user interface to easily guide youth to find specific courses. It is 
an easy, fast and free way for adolescents and youth to access 
further education opportunities. 
NO LOST 
GENERATION 
Some 1.25 million 
Syrian refugee 
children enrolled 
in formal education 
222,140 
girls and boys 
participating in structured, 
sustained child protection 
or psychosocial support 
programmes 
(64 % of target) 
4. 5. 
Strategic Direction Strategic Direction 

14 Regional Strategic Overview 15 
Regional Refugee & Resilience Plan (3RP) 2019-2020 
Regional Strategic Overview 
Regional Refugee & Resilience Plan (3RP) 2019-2020 
FOCUS GROUP DISCUSSIONS IN LEBANON 
In Lebanon, bi-monthly focus group discussions (FGDs) have 
been conducted for several years now to provide timely and 
accurate information on needs and perceived quality of support. 
FGDs explore refugees interaction with response programmes 
and reveal factors that facilitate or hinder the use of the services. 
Findings are used to adjust programming where necessary. 
The 3RP response model is built on partnership at every level: local, 
sub-national, national and regional. Over 270 partners contributed 
to developing the 2019-2020 response. This includes those appealing 
directly in the 3RP, including national actors, United Nations agencies, 
international NGOs and national NGOs, as well as those indirectly as 
implementing partners. The 3RP platform also engages municipalities, 
civil society groups, academia, charities and foundations which play a 
key role in shaping the response. 
The 3RP places a strong emphasis on continued outreach and partnership 
in a number of areas. First, engaging local organizations in the response, 
including grassroots women’s organization, as they understand the 
local context and ensure that solutions are community-owned. Second, 
engaging the private sector and entrepreneurs, who can often offer 
technical expertise, insight and innovation not readily available in the 
humanitarian community. Third, young people and adolescents whose 
voice is critical if 3RP response programming is to be reflective of their 
needs and unlock their full potential. Fourth, by expanding knowledge 
and research jointly which enables humanitarian and development 
actors to fill gaps in understanding and improve programming and policy. 
Some examples of innovative partnerships are outlined on this page 
while more can be found in the 3RP country chapters. 
Strategic Direction 
CONTINUED OUTREACH 
AND PARTNERSHIPS 
NUMBER OF PARTNERS - 
EVOLUTION 270 
PARTNERS 
YEAR 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 
3RP / SYRIA HRP COLLABORATION 
Closer linkages between the 3RP and the Humanitarian Response 
Plan (HRP) for inside Syria have been forged. This has included 
through developing joint contextual analysis and planning 
assumptions, as well as pursuing joint advocacy opportunities. 
These linkages will continue throughout 2019. 
FOOD SECURITY INNOVATION 
Food Security partners are sprouting innovative solutions across 
the region to address deep-rooted issues. Through the H2Grow 
project, Food Security partners in Jordan is testing various 
hydroponics solutions, a water-efficient and soilless cultivation 
technique, to ensure greater food security for vulnerable families 
living in challenging desert conditions. This includes moving from 
using an initial high-tech solar-powered container to designing 
small, DIY household units built with locally procured materials 
and at ten percent of the cost. The result is the production of fresh 
fodder for goats which improves milk production and meat quality, 
helping beneficiaries to support themselves on a daily basis. 
At the heart of fostering partnerships is the goal of bringing 
innovative solutions to address social problems. In Beirut, 
seeking to provide livelihoods solutions to the most vulnerable, 
while addressing the city’s shortage of accessible recycling 
opportunities, 3RP partners joined forces with LiveLoveLebanon 
to create an innovative solution to both problems. A smartphone 
app was created to facilitate free pickups for those wishing to 
recycle. Participating beneficiaries that collect recyclables are 
paid a monthly stipend through the cash assistance system, 
withdrawing monthly salaries from ATMs to cover food expenses 
or other basic needs. 
INNOVATIVE PARTNERSHIPS FOR 
VULNERABLE YOUNG PEOPLE 
INNOVATION 4 CRISIS (I4C) LEARNING EVENT 
Following the successful first edition of the I4C event in late 2016 
and leveraging on the initiatives growing innovation network, the 
second edition of the I4C Regional Learning Event will be held in 
2019. The event will explore how UN agencies, governments, 
local and international non-organization respond to protracted 
crises and will consist of several learning sessions that aim at 
knowledge sharing and taking stock of new innovative solutions, 
networking and reinforce effective, efficient and locally-led 
practices in the response. 
Accountability remains a cornerstone of the 3RP, with partners seeking to 
empower refugees to seek access to quality and effective interventions. 
UN and NGO partners in the 3RP remain commitmed to ensuring their 
approach and programming reflects the Core Humanitarian Standards 
on Quality and Accountability, including those commitments related to 
preparedness, resilience, and risk-reduction. 
3RP partners have systems and processes in place to engage with 
communities meaningfully and to monitor their own interventions and 
ensure the money spent and services delivered are effective, appropriate, 
considering age, gender and diversity considerations, and that they 
demonstrate value for money. For example, some 3RP countries have 
a monitoring and evaluation (M&E) framework in place which helps to 
better measure the impact of the response, and to strengthen linkages 
between output and overall strategic objectives, increasingly through 
measurement of inter-sectoral impacts. 
Mechanisms for two-way communications with communities are 
implemented and maintained. Enabling people to engage meaningfully, 
in feedback and response systems, and to seek redress, is critical to 
ensure 3RP partners understand the needs and challenges of people of 
concern, to help evolve programming, and ultimately, to ensure refugees 
and affected people can live in dignity. 
ENHANCED ACCOUNTABILITY 
MECHANISMS 
MAIN TYPES 
OF OUTREACH 
Physical 
Targeted visits Infolines / Hotlines 
Outreach volunteers Call centres 
Community spaces & centres WhatsApp and SMS 
Community-led structures Facebook & other Social Media 
Community-led initiatives Dedicated web pages 
Virtual 
3RP REPORTING CALENDAR 
The 3RP recognizes the importance of reporting on the 
progress, challenges and impact in each country. This 
is vital for all stakeholders, but particularly donors who 
generously provide funding for the response. All 3RP 
partners report on their activities through a variety of 
inter-agency products. These products report on progress 
towards the country-level and regional-level indicator 
targets in all sectors, and all are available on the 3RP 
website www.3rpsyriacrisis.org: 
• 3RP Monthly sector dashboards 
• 3RP Quarterly sector dashboards 
• 3RP Mid-year progress report 
• 3RP Annual report 
IMPACT BASED REPORTING 
With the resilience component receiving increased funding in 
absolute terms since 2015, it is critical to demonstrate impact 
and medium-to-long term results. In 2019, 3RP partners will work 
on revising mechanisms to better highlight progress against 
the resilience component and also measure and demonstrate 
impact. 
MORE THAN 
6. 7. 
Strategic Direction 

16 Regional Strategic Overview 
Regional Refugee & Resilience Plan (3RP) 2019-2020 
PALESTINE REFUGEES 
The notion of “durable solutions” should be applied with caution 
to Palestine refugees. Palestine refugees affected by the Syria 
crisis have similar needs and should be treated similarly in 
relation to the identification of “solutions” for their displacement 
within or from Syria. However, any consideration regarding 
“solutions” to be found for displacement within or from Syria in 
the context of the 3RP will be without prejudice to their status 
and rights linked to the initial displacement of Palestine refugees 
as a result of the 1948 conflict. The need for a just and durable 
solution for Palestine refugees, in accordance with international 
law, including General Assembly Resolution 194, will remain 
regardless of any “solutions” pursued for persons displaced 
within or from Syria more broadly. 
MAIN RESETTLEMENT CRITERIA 
• Legal and/or Physical Protection Needs 
• Survivors of Torture and/or Violence 
• Women and Girls at Risk 
• Children and Adolescents at Risk 
• Medical Needs 
• Family reunification 
Refugees continue to require access to territory, international protection, 
and humanitarian support in countries of asylum. At the same time, given 
the protracted nature of the crisis, opportunities for durable solutions are 
urgently needed so refugees can look to the future with hope and dignity. 
Noting the necessity of preserving and supporting protection space for 
refugees, and reaffirming that no solutions hierarchy exists, durable 
solutions for refugees from Syria are: 
• Voluntary, safe, and dignified return to Syria 
• Local solutions and opportunities 
• Resettlement to a third country 
• Access to a third country through legal means other 
than resettlement (complementary pathways) 
Voluntary, safe and dignified return 1 
All refugees have the fundamental human right to return to their 
country of origin at a time of their own choosing as codified in several 
international instruments, including Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights (UDHR) (Art.13) and International Covenant on Civil and Political 
Rights (ICCPR) (Art. 12). Refugee repatriation should be based on a 
voluntary decision by refugees to return. It should not be coerced either 
directly or indirectly through changes of policies that restrict refugee 
rights or by limiting assistance to refugees in the country of asylum. 
The Comprehensive Protection and Solutions Strategy: Protection 
Thresholds and Parameters for Refugee Return to Syria (February 2018) 
sets out the framework for 3RP partners engagement on return. 
For the 2019 response, 3RP partners have not planned to facilitate or 
promote return. However, as self-organized returns are likely to continue, 
3RP partners have planned for the provision of support to ensure that 
any self-organized return is made in dignity, without incentivizing 
additional returns. Such support includes, inter alia, counselling and 
assessments of the voluntary nature of return, support in regularizing 
civil documentation; intention surveys; capacity building; data analysis; 
and, communications with communities. This is the same approach as 
undertaken in 2018. 
In terms of larger-scale organized return, 3RP partners have been 
engaged in preparedness and planning since early 2017. Under 
established coordination mechanisms related to durable solutions at the 
regional and country level, planning for large-scale organized return will 
continue in 2019 to ensure necessary levels of preparedness, centered on 
refugees’ intentions and concerns. 
Local solutions and opportunities 
It is essential that the international community maintains a 
comprehensive approach to solutions. While some will return, many 
Syrian refugees are likely to remain in host countries for the medium 
term. Expanding local opportunities, in the context of durable solutions 
for refugees, is therefore a critical aspect. Such opportunities, from 
a solutions perspective, can include, inter alia, providing sustainable 
livelihood opportunities for refugees, which would mitigate the need to 
consider irregular movements to third countries, and bridging the gap 
between refugees’ skills and local market demands through supportive 
legal frameworks and more certification and recertification opportunities 
for recognizing education and skills. While the scale and scope of 
activities in this area is according to the local context in each country, 
more information on relevant 3RP partners activities is outlined in the 
other strategic directions, particularly enhanced economic opportuntiies, 
as well as in the sector overviews. 
Resettlement to a third country 
Resettlement as a solution is an important option which prioritizes 
the most vulnerable refugees. Through resettlement, the international 
community demonstrates responsibility sharing in the most visible 
manner, while playing a part in preserving protection space in host 
countries. Resettlement is based on agreed global resettlement criteria. 
Advocacy for resettlement of Syrian refugees will continue to be essential, 
even though it may remain a limited option overall. 
Other means of legal access to third countries 
One of the prominent features of the New York Declaration for Refugees 
and Migrants is the call for expanded access to third countries through 
means other than resettlement. Important “complementary pathways” in 
the Syria context are family reunification, scholarships and student visas, 
and labour mobility. 
DURABLE SOLUTIONS 
FOR SYRIAN REFUGEES 
1 This section refers to voluntary returns only. If returns cannot be considered voluntary, they are categorized as returns in adverse conditions. 
TOTAL REGISTERED 
SYRIAN REFUGEES 
IN THE REGION 
RESETTLEMENT NEEDS SYRIAN REFUGEE RESETTLEMENT 
TARGETS AND SUBMISSIONS 
SELF-ORGANIZED 
SYRIAN REFUGEE RETURNS 
2.3 
million 
3.7 
million 
4.6 
million 
4.8 
million 
5.5 
million 
5.6 
million 
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 Nov 2018 
10 % 
0.5 % 
of Syrian refugees are in need of resettlement 
and meet resettlement criteria 
of Syrian refugees will be submitted for 
resettlement (only one in 20 of those in need) 
Target 
14,000 
Target 
8,500 
Resettlement 
(RST) 
Submissions 
9,530 
RST 
Submissions 
7,036 
Target 
4,885 
RST 
Submissions 
4,709 
RST 
Submissions 
647 
Target 
790 
Target 
1,600 
RST 
Submissions 
1,462 
People Targeted 
Number of 
Cumulative RST Submissions 
January-September 2018 
Turkey Lebanon Jordan Egypt Iraq 2016 2017 as of November 2018 
These figures relate to returns verified and conformed by UNHCR, 
based on government sources and direct observation by UNHCR. 
The actual number of returns may be significantly higher. 
28,320 
refugee 
returns 
50,901 
refugee 
returns 
8. 
Strategic Direction 
42,728 
refugee 
returns

Regional Strategic Overview 19 
Regional Refugee & Resilience Plan (3RP) 2019-2020 
18 Regional Strategic Overview 
Regional Refugee & Resilience Plan (3RP) 2019-2020 
The 3RP was initiated in 2015 to better respond 
to protracted crisis, combining refugee 
programming with resilience interventions to 
build the long-term resilience of both refugees 
and host communities. Co-led by humanitarian 
and development partners, the 3RP has created 
spaces for synergies among partners to build 
on their comparative advantages. Across 
the region, this has helped to ensure that 
the response is coherent and the outcomes 
collective, while more broadly filling knowledge 
and policy gaps in protracted crisis response. 
Examples of agencies working to bridge the 
gap have emerged. This includes integrating 
refugees in Jordan’s National Education 
Strategy as well as UN agencies support to 
strengthening capacity of national social 
assistance programs. The 3RP community is 
working towards documenting the refugee/ 
resilience model and successful examples 
therein to further develop the response and 
offer a resource for other contexts to consider. 
Regional and country-to-country learning on 
humanitarian-development nexus policy and 
programming is planned for 2019. 
One area of where 3RP partners have focused 
on is partnering with local respondents and 
using and reinforcing national and local 
systems. The upcoming 3RP report, “Localised 
Resilience in action: Responding to the 
Regional Syria Crisis,” analyzes the application 
of global commitments on localisation in the 
context of the sub-regional response to the 
Syria crisis, and how 3RP partners delivering 
on commitments through on-the-ground 
innovation and responses. 
3RP partners, in collaboration with line 
ministries and other national actors, have made 
strides in enhancing linkages with national 
systems. This includes promoting access 
to paid work and social security, the use of 
common platforms and tools, the joint piloting 
of programs with national stakeholders, and 
promoting the use of innovation, such as digital 
systems and biometric authentication. These 
approaches were highlighted at the Renewed 
Resilience Commitment in Amman held in April 
2018. 
The realities of protracted displacement have 
led the international community to place 
a greater emphasis on leveraging national 
social protection systems to address the 
vulnerabilities of both refugees and host 
communities. This reflects commitments 
towards the SDGs, the Global Compact on 
Refugees and other global initiatives, and 
towards pursuing more sustainable solutions 
for refugees, alongside efforts to secure the 
sustainability of the response. 
In 2019, 3RP partners will continue to seek 
opportunities to address the vulnerabilities 
of refugees within national social protection 
frameworks and leverage their cumulative 
experience to strengthen the capacity of 
national social protection providers. This could 
include, for example, support for improved 
targeting across vulnerable national and 
refugee populations, harmonized frameworks 
for delivery, and improving prevention capacity 
through the introduction of mechanisms for risk 
preparedness. 
HUMANITARIAN 
/ DEVELOPMENT 
NEXUS 
SOCIAL 
PROTECTION 
DEFINING SOCIAL PROTECTION 
SOCIAL 
PROTECTION 
Palestine refugees remain particularly vulnerable, facing 
significant humanitarian and protection needs. Over 430,000 
Palestine refugees remain inside Syria, while around 50,000 have 
fled to Lebanon and Jordan. Futher, some 3,000 are estimated to 
be in Egypt and under 1,000 in Gaza. 
Many Palestine refugees from Syria (PRS) who have been able 
to reach Jordan and Lebanon live in a difficult environment 
with heightened protection risks including refoulment in 
some instances. While they are able to benefit from the regular 
services provided by UNRWA, including access to basic schooling 
and health care, alongside its humanitarian assistance, the 
Agency’s ability to extend this support has been undermined by 
the funding crisis faced in 2018. 
Levels of humanitarian needs amongst Palestine refugees forced 
to flee Syria remain extremely high. In Lebanon, the poverty rate 
among families of Palestine Refugees from Syria is estimated at 
89 per cent and almost 95 per cent are food insecure, whilst in 
Jordan, 31 per cent of the 4,386 PRS households recorded with 
UNRWA are female-headed, facing high levels of vulnerability. 
UNRWA’s dedicated appeal document for 
2019 describes the plight facing Palestine 
refugees affected by the regional Syria 
crisis. The 2019 Syria regional crisis 
Emergency Appeal will be published in 
January 2019 and will be available at 
www.unrwa.org/Syria-crisis 
PALESTINE 
REFUGEES 
FROM SYRIA 
Non-contributory 
Social Assistance 
Contributory 
Social Insurance Active Labour 
Market Policies 
Social Care 
Subsidies 
• Cash for Work 
• Food for Work 
• Fuel 
• Food 
• Unemployment 
• Maternity 
• Disability 
• Work Accidents 
• Work-sharing 
• Training 
• Job-search 
Services 
• For basic Health 
/ Education 
Old-age 
Pension 
Survivor’s 
Insurance for: Benefits Subsidies Social 
Transfers 
Public Works 
Programmes 
Fee 
Waivers 
• Cash Transfers 
• Vouchers 
• In-kind transfers

20 Regional Strategic Overview 
Regional Refugee & Resilience Plan (3RP) 2019-2020 
ASSESSMENTS 
& EVALUATION 
The 3RP response in each country is built on conducting protection 
and assistance needs analysis and determining priorities based on the 
evidence gathered. In the 3RP countries, a wide range of assessments 
take place throughout the year, including sectoral, inter-sectoral, 
thematic, and agency-specific assessments. At country level, inter-sector 
working groups ensure, to the extent possible, a harmonized approach 
so that all the assessments in a particular country come together to 
build consensus around the key needs, with due regard given to specific 
needs of groups, such as children, women, female-headed households, 
elderly, people with disabilities and Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender 
or Intersex (LBGTI) people. 
As the crisis has become more protracted, and vulnerabilities deepened, 
3RP partners have responded with more in-depth assessments and 
evaluations that provides more granular detail over larger sample sizes. 
This includes charting how specific or inter-sectoral needs have evolved, 
as well as evaluating certain aspects of the response to ensure that it 
remains effective and coherent. Some examples of recent assessments 
and evaluations are highlighted below, while a full range of assessments 
is available at: https://data2.unhcr.org/en/situations/syria 
Gender discrimination and inequality 
places Syrian refugee women and girls 
at heightened risk of violence and 
exploitation, which is exacerbated by 
shifting gender roles and conditions 
in displacement. UN Women sought 
to assess the gendered impact of 
the Syria crisis, and to look at the 
status of refugee women and girls in 
Lebanon, Jordan, and the Kurdistan 
The Vulnerability Assessment of 
Syrian Refugees in Lebanon (VASyR) 
is an annual survey assessing the 
situation of registered Syrian refugee 
households to identify situational 
changes and trends. Among the 
key findings, Syrian refugees in 
Lebanon are spending less every 
year, reporting per capita monthly 
expenditures of USD 98, a drop of USD 
Region of Iraq. The aim of the three country studies was to 
gain a better understanding of the impact of displacement on 
gender dynamics, including women’s roles and responsibility, 
women’s experiences of, and access to, humanitarian aid, and 
their experiences of violence. Studies were conducted with 
female Syrian refugees, and the resulting reports highlight the 
situation of women and girls living in displacement. Despite 
differences in context, similar themes emerged from the 
studies. These speak to women’s life in displacement being 
characterized by economic insecurity, limited employment 
opportunities despite a desire to work, challenges in 
accessing aid, acute isolation, increasing levels of violence 
against women, and changing gender dynamics both in the 
private and public spheres. 
Available at: 
http://www2.unwomen.org/-/media/field%20 
office%20arab%20states/attachments/ 
publications/2018/refugeecrisis-all-brief-final-links. 
pdf?la=en&vs=2008 
6 compared to 2016 and USD 9 since 2015. This is a sign that 
households have fewer resources. Three quarters of Syrian 
refugee households had expenditures below the Minimum 
Expenditure Basket (MEB), unable to meet basic needs of 
food, health, shelter and education. Even more worrying, 58 
per cent of households had a per capita expenditure below 
the Survival Minimum Expenditure Basket (SMEB), meaning 
they were living in extreme poverty, unable to meet survival 
needs—an increase of five percentage points over 2016. 
Some 36 per cent of refugee households in Lebanon have 
no working member, with the need to take care of children 
and adults in the household, as well as a lack of skills and/ 
or experience among the barriers cited. The assessment 
concluded that the limitations on access to the labour market 
and consequent lack of income opportunities have made 
it difficult for refugees to meet their basic needs without 
external assistance. In addition, two thirds of Syrian refugees 
have continued to adopt crisis and emergency coping 
strategies, such as selling household goods, productive assets 
and housing or land, or withdrawing children from school. 
Available at: 
https://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/ 
resources/VASyR%202017.compressed.pdf 
REGIONAL: STATUS OF REFUGEE WOMEN AND GIRLS 
LEBANON : VULNERABILITY ASSESSMENT 
OF SYRIAN REFUGEES IN LEBANON 
ASSESSMENT OF 
THE JORDANIAN 
MARKETPLACE 
Basic Needs and Shelter Working 
Groups - Jordan 
Multi-Market Assessment 
Jordan 2018 
The Syrian refugee crisis impacted all 
segments of the Jordanian market. 
The arrival of upwards of 655,000 
refugees transformed Jordan’s 
communities and marketplace. The 
crisis closed traditional trade routes 
and shook investors’ confidence in the 
economy. The International Monetary 
Fund (IMF) estimates that the 
Jordanian economy lost one percent of GDP per year of the 
crisis due to loss in exports and investment. UNHCR and the 
Norwegian Refugee Council, in coordination with the Basic 
Needs and Shelter Working groups, embarked on this Market 
Assessment to better understand how the Jordanian market 
functions and how the market has responded in the past five 
years to the Syrian refugee crisis. With the number of Syrian 
refugees entering Jordan stabilized, this report reassesses 
market conditions and the continued appropriateness of 
cash-based interventions. 
Available at: 
https://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/ 
resources/MarketAssessment02.01.2018FINAL.pdf 
JORDAN: ASSESSMENT OF THE JORDANIAN MARKETPLACE 
Joint 
Vulnerability 
Assessment 
June 2018 
WFP and UNHCR carried out a Joint 
Vulnerability Assessment (JVA) of 
Syrian refugees in the Kurdistan 
Region of Iraq (KR-I) in mid-2018. 
Among the key findings, households 
were found to use different coping 
mechanisms, which vary across the 
governorates and across levels of 
vulnerability. The study concluded 
that more than half of Syrian households in all governorates 
experienced a lack of food or of money to buy enough 
food to meet the needs of their household members. In 
addition, a quarter of Syrian refugee households in Erbil 
and Sulaymaniyah used consumption coping strategies 
irrespective of their food security status. Eating less preferred 
food, limiting portion sizes and reducing the number of meals 
were the most commonly used coping mechanisms. In Erbil 
and Dohuk, it was widely observed that vulnerable families 
experienced asset depletion and indebtedness, and needed 
to resort to a set of coping mechanisms that negatively 
impacted their lives and the community at large. 
Available at: 
https://reliefweb.int/report/iraq/joint-vulnerabilityassessment-
june-2018 
IRAQ: JOINT VULNERABILITY ASSESSMENT 
UNHCR Egypt Socioeconomic Assessment Report 
1 
OF SYRIAN REFUGEES IN EGYPT 2016 
VULNERABILITY ASSESSMENT 
Through conducting the Egypt 
Vulnerability Assessment for Refugees 
(EVAR) in 2017, results show that 
85 per cent of registered Syrian 
refugees are unable to meet their 
basic needs. In order to meet these 
needs, 64 per cent of households are 
forced to resort to negative coping 
mechanisms as a way of generating 
income. This result comes after the increase of cost of living, 
particularly food commodities, services, electricity and 
gasoline. Through the EVAR, 3RP partners have found that the 
protracted nature of the Syria crisis calls for more investment 
in local institutions and the strengthening of their capacities 
to understand the needs and challenges of the displaced 
and local populations. The study shows also emphasizes 
the importance of targeted assistance in the areas of food, 
health, education, basic needs, and livelihoods, along with 
community-based interventions to enhance outreach and 
strengthen service delivery systems in the most impacted 
governorates. 
Available at: 
https://data2.unhcr.org/en/documents/details/61527 
EGYPT: VULNERABILITY ASSESSMENT OF 
SYRIAN REFUGEES IN EGYPT 2016 
SUPPORT TO PUBLIC INSTITUTIONS 
IN THE TURKEY REFUGEE AND RESILIENCE 
RESPONSE PLAN (3RP) 
2017-2018 
The report examines the 
complementary efforts of partners 
of the 3RP response in Turkey in 
supporting public institutions and 
municipalities in the refugee response 
to the Syria crisis, to increase their 
capacities to cope with the crisis. 
Through tracking funding flows and 
investments made to and through 
public institutions on a regular basis, results show that 68 
per cent of funding received in 2017 was allocated to or 
through public institutions. Building on this, in the first 
half of 2018, the proportion of assistance going to public 
institutions or through them reached 98 per cent of the funds, 
emphasizing the importance which 3RP partners attach to 
supporting governmental efforts. This includes no less than 
17 different ministries and public institutions, in addition to 
60 municipalities. 
Available at: 
https://data2.unhcr.org/en/documents/details/66186 
TURKEY: 3RP SUPPORT TO PUBLIC INSTITUTIONS 
IN THE TURKEY AND RESILIENCE RESPONSE PLAN

PROTECTION SECTOR 
Number of girls and boys participating in 
structured, sustained child protection or 
psychosocial support programmes
713 million 
6,217,195 
215 
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 
FOOD SECURITY SECTOR 
Number of beneficiaries reached with food 
vouchers or cash assistance for food
697 million 
EDUCATION SECTOR 
Number of children (5-17 years, girls and boys) 
enrolled in formal general education 
979 million 
HEALTH SECTOR 
Number of consultations for target population 
in primary health care services 
336 million 
BASIC NEEDS SECTOR 
Number of individuals received unconditional, 
sector-specific or emergency cash assistance 
1.5 billion 
SHELTER SECTOR 
Number of individuals outside of camps received 
assistance for shelter or shelter upgrades 
142 million 
WASH SECTOR 
Number of individuals benefitted from access 
to adequate latrines 
271 million 
LIVELIHOODS & SOCIAL COHESION SECTOR 
Number of individuals assisted to access 
wage employment opportunities 
685 million 
2019 Requirements in USD 
2019 Requirements in USD 2019 Requirements in USD 
2019 Requirements in USD 
Targeted Population Targeted Population Targeted Population Targeted Population 
Number of Partners Number of Partners Number of Partners Number of Partners 
2019 Requirements in USD 
2019 Requirements in USD 2019 Requirements in USD 
2019 Requirements in USD 
NOTE: All figures subject to change pending finalization/release/launch of the 3RP country chapters 
Figures include the achievements under the 3RP since 2015 and its predecessor, the Regional Response Plan (RRP) 
Reach in previous years 
Reach in previous years 
Reach in previous years 
Reach in previous years 
Reach in previous years 
Reach in previous years 
Reach in previous years 
Reach in previous years 
REGIONAL / SECTOR RESPONSE REGIONAL / SECTOR RESPONSE 
168,000 
784,333 585,569 
784,231 
636,552 
2,746,069 
2,295,982 2,248,694 
1,923,770 
1,394,000 
2,000,000 
3,667,826 3,338,682 
2,549,625 2,760,886 
491,000 614,661 739,756 
1,149,859 
343,345 
0 
10,802 
20,154 
214,868 29,561 30,337 
393,611 
658,313 
919,669 1,064,225 
407,497 541,655 
1,474,755 
2,586,029 
163,000 
436,160 345,885 366,332 
596,577 
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 
2,522,000 314,900 
82 41 
2,902,000 2,119,800 
132 64 
Targeted Population Targeted Population Targeted Population Targeted Population 
Number of Partners Number of Partners Number of Partners Number of Partners 
6,601,900 850,200 
88 211 
4,449,100 
92 
* Includes Palestine refugees in Lebanon and Palestine refugees from Syria 
**2018 figures are as of 30 September 2018 
* Includes Palestine refugees in Lebanon and Palestine refugees from Syria 
**2018 figures are as of 30 September 2018

24 Regional Strategic Overview 25 
Regional Refugee & Resilience Plan (3RP) 2019-2020 
Regional Strategic Overview 
Regional Refugee & Resilience Plan (3RP) 2019-2020 
• Securing access to territory, asylum, and basic rights 
• Mitigating the risk and impact of Sexual and Gender-Based Violence 
• Strengthening Child Protection 
• Enhancing community engagement/outreach towards identifying the needs 
of the most vulnerable and fostering peaceful co-existence 
Protection programming and advocacy for legal stay, access to essential 
services, and realization of solutions remains of paramount importance 
in 3RP countries. The sector response applies an Age, Gender and 
Diversity sensitive approach, tailored to the needs of refugee women, 
girls, men and boys. 
Community-based protection approaches help to identify the most 
serious protection risks, explore their causes and effects, and jointly 
decide with affected individuals and groups on how to prevent, mitigate 
and respond to them. It achieves a better protection impact and improves 
their lives, by supporting their access to protection and services. Diverse 
outreach and engagement methods are used through communication, 
feedback and response outlets, including safe and confidential complaint 
mechanisms. 
In collaboration with host governments, rule of law institutions, and civil 
society, partners will strengthen national systems and capacity, promote 
gender equality in national legal frameworks, provide protection from 
sexual exploitation and abuse (PSEA), and improve data management. 
Gaps in civil status, legal and identity documentation, coupled with 
family separation, can pose risks of statelessness, especially for children. 
The 3RP response markedly increased the number of refugee children 
beginning life with an official birth certificate through providing evidence 
of their identity, parentage and nationality. Resolving documentation 
challenges also helps to secure property rights and facilitates access to 
durable solutions, in line with the preferences and informed decisions 
of refugees. Continued engagement with resettlement countries for the 
most vulnerable refugees is also critical in responsibility-sharing with 
host countries and addressing humanitarian needs. 
The child protection response prioritizes effective implementation of 
best interests procedures with regard to alternative care arrangements, 
family tracing and the strengthening of national systems. Building 
on the evidence generated through pilot projects to use cashbased 
interventions to address protection risks, which mostly affect 
adolescents and youth, 3RP partners will strengthen the framework to 
protect young refugees by increasing access to educational, training and 
livelihoods opportunities and supporting youth-led initiatives. 
Sexual and Gender Based Violence (SGBV) affects refugee women, 
girls, men and boys, including those who are still often overlooked 
in SGBV multi-sectoral programming such as children, persons with 
disabilities, older persons, and lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and 
intersex (LGBTI) persons. The strategy to mainstream SGBV prevention, 
mitigation and response across all sectors includes establishing safe, 
confidential, appropriate and effective services. 
Partners will improve the accessibility and quality of mental health and 
psycho-social support (MHPSS) services. 
Since the beginning of the Syria crisis, Food Security partners have 
continually worked to reach those most affected across the region with 
life-saving food assistance, while increasingly focusing on the promotion 
of dietary diversity, sustainable agriculture and rural livelihoods. In 
2018, 1.7 million people in need were reached on average with monthly 
assistance, with plans to reach two million beneficiaries monthly on 
average in 2019. 
Nonetheless, the food security situation in the region remains 
challenging. Food and livelihoods assistance for those in need will 
continue to be a necessity as inflation, lack of formal income-generating 
opportunities, and economic instability challenge the food security of 
refugees and host communities. While the food security situation in 
Lebanon has slightly improved, in Jordan it has in fact declined with 
80 percent of Syrian refugees in communities being food insecure or 
vulnerable to food insecurity, compared to 72 percent in 2016. 
Important successes, however, have been achieved over the past year 
and the sector will continue to build on these advances. Unrestricted 
cash programmes have been scaled up, innovative social protection 
programmes are being put into place, significant strides have been made 
in primary school education and nutrition, and enhanced targeting has 
improved the ability to identify and support the most vulnerable refugee 
households region-wide. 
Innovative responses are found across the region. In Jordan and 
Lebanon, a respective 83 and 23 percent of Syrian refugees are now 
reached through two innovative hybrid cash assistance modalities, 
allowing them to use food-restricted e-cards in a network of more 
than 700 contracted shops while also having the choice to withdraw 
multipurpose cash from ATMs directly as preferred. With beneficiaries 
using this modality scoring higher acceptable food security levels than 
those restricted to food e-cards, additional beneficiaries in Lebanon will 
be reached using this modality before the end of the year, while all Syrian 
refugees in communities in Jordan will have this choice in early 2019. In 
Jordan specifically, blockchain technology is also used to deliver cashbased 
assistance more efficiently. 
Furthermore, the Food Security sector continues to align its priorities 
along the humanitarian-development nexus. For example, partners 
have expanded their livelihoods portfolio to reach more than 107,000 
beneficiaries with Food for Training and Food for Assets activities. 
Further, partners will promote agricultural investment for smallscale 
farmers, including the provision of agricultural skills, and the 
rehabilitation of farmlands and agricultural infrastructure. 
10 14 2 6 
103 30 
36 
NUMBER OF 34 
3RP PARTNERS 
NUMBER OF 
3RP PARTNERS 
Egypt Iraq Jordan Lebanon Turkey Egypt Iraq Jordan Lebanon Turkey 
Regional Sector Response Summary Regional Sector Response Summary 
NOTE: This is a non-exhaustive and summarized list; objectives vary between countries 
according to contextual and operational specificities 
80 % 
of Syrian refugee children have an official 
birth certificate from the country 
of asylum, whereas 98 % have a 
medical birth notification. 
TARGETED POPULATION 
REQUIREMENTS 
TARGETED POPULATION 
REQUIREMENTS 
• Supporting access to food for the most vulnerable 
• Promoting food availability and supporting sustainable production 
• Supporting food self-reliance including income-generating opportunities 
• Capacity building in the food and agriculture sectors 
NOTE: This is a non-exhaustive and summarized list; objectives vary between countries 
according to contextual and operational specificities 
Egypt 
26 m 37 m 
156 m 
204 m 
290 m 
Iraq Jordan * Lebanon Turkey Egypt Iraq Jordan * Lebanon Turkey 
FOOD SECURITY 
SECTOR 
PROTECTION 
SECTOR 
49 m 30 m 
187 m 
391 m 
39 m 
* Jordan figures are pending review by the Government of 
Jordan and therefore may be subject to change in due course. 
* Jordan figures are pending review by the Government of 
Jordan and therefore may be subject to change in due course. 
NOTE: The decision to report on ESSN and food assistance in Turkey as part of the 
Basic Needs Sector has reduced the Food Security Sector’s overall figures compared to last year. 
At present, 
OBJECTIVES OBJECTIVES 
6,210,597 
TOTAL APPEAL TOTAL APPEAL 
USD 713 million 
2,522,000 
USD 697 million 
33.5 % 
of Syrian refugee households 
in Lebanon are moderately or 
severely food insecure. 
10 
52

26 Regional Strategic Overview 27 
Regional Refugee & Resilience Plan (3RP) 2019-2020 
Regional Strategic Overview 
Regional Refugee & Resilience Plan (3RP) 2019-2020 
The adverse effects of the crisis, displacement and loss of community 
and resources on families and girls and boys have accumulated creating 
multiple, inter-related and complex barriers to structured learning 
opportunities. Today around 700,000 Syrian girls and boys remain 
without access to any form of education in the five host countries of 
Turkey, Lebanon, Jordan, Iraq and Egypt. 
At the second “Supporting the Future of Syria and the Region” conference 
hosted by the EU in Brussels in April 2018, the international community 
and the governments of refugee hosting countries reaffirmed their 
commitment to support the millions of civilians affected by the conflict 
in Syria as well as the refugees and the host communities. Continued, 
flexible, unconditional and long-term resources in the education sector 
are needed to improve existing systems and scale up alternative options 
for children and youth to engage in quality learning. 3RP partners 
will accelerate efforts to increase access to sustainable, relevant and 
contextual quality education opportunities, by: 
• Supporting national efforts in strengthening education systems, 
including teacher training and incentive programmes, in host countries 
that are inclusive to refugees as well as local vulnerable children; 
• Expanding multiple pathways to learning that are flexible and 
responsive to the learning needs and requirements of children and youth, 
particularly those that have dropped out of school and will most likely 
not be able to return to formal education; 
• Prioritizing learning and the acquisition of skills, with adequate tools for 
monitoring outcomes to inform evidence-based decision making; 
• Improving multi-sectoral responses that link education, protection and 
livelihood interventions; 
• Ensuring that diversified learning opportunities, including skills training 
and tertiary education, are recognized and certified to facilitate reentering 
into formal schooling or the world of work. 
National health systems across the region continue to be the primary 
responders to the needs of Syrian refugees. In Turkey, Syrians under 
Temporary Protection in the community are eligible to receive the same 
health care as Turkish nationals, with insurance premiums paid by the 
Government. In Lebanon, Syrian refugees have access to a range of 
subsidized primary health care services through Government clinics and 
dispensaries. In Jordan, refugees have access to health services, but have 
had to pay the ‘foreigner’ rate since mid-2018 following a policy decision 
by the Government, resulting in a two-to-five-fold increase in the cost 
of healthcare. In Egypt and Iraq, Syrian refugees continue to have free 
access to health services in line with those provided to nationals. 
Not withstanding the generous response in general, the health needs of 
Syrian refugees remain high across the region. In addition to needs for 
basic health care services, reproductive, non-communicable diseases, 
and mental and psychosocial stress are major health problems. Access 
to services can be limited, not only by capacity in the health system but 
also financial capacity of refugees. As illustrated above, policy changes 
related to healthcare in 3RP countries can impact the ability of refugees 
to access quality healthcare. 
With health systems under increasing strain, 3RP partners across the 
region have prioritized supporting the capacity of national health 
systems to increase access to essential health care with a focus on 
the major needs of the Syrian refugees. This support comes in various 
forms, including direct support through the provision of equipment and 
supplies, capacity building, and system strengthening. 
The sector also provides direct subsidies to help individual refugees ccess 
health services, including for referral to essential secondary and tertiary 
health care. Targeted interventions are made to meet the needs of 
specific groups including women, girls, children, adolescents and youth, 
the disabled, and older persons. 
In countries with refugee camps - Iraq, Turkey and Jordan - health care 
services will continue to be provided in those camps in cooperation 
between Government authorities and 3RP partners. 
Egypt Iraq Jordan Lebanon Turkey Egypt Iraq Jordan Lebanon Turkey 
16 
18 12 10 
44 46 
28 28 
8 
10 
Regional Sector Response Summary Regional Sector Response Summary 
EDUCATION 
SECTOR 
HEALTH 
SECTOR 
> 30,000 
additional classrooms urgently needed 
in Turkey to effectively accommodate 
all learners requiring access to school. 
56 % 
of refugee households in Iraq 
face issues accessing healthcare. 
TARGETED POPULATION 
REQUIREMENTS 
TARGETED POPULATION 
REQUIREMENTS 
• Increasing equal and sustainable access to formal and non-formal education 
• Improving the quality of formal and non-formal education 
• Strengthening the capacity of national education systems 
NOTE: This is a non-exhaustive and summarized list; objectives vary between countries 
according to contextual and operational specificities 
• Improving access to primary health care (PHC) services for refugees and 
host communities 
• Strengthening the capacity of health institutions 
• Strengthening Reproductive Health Services in camps and impacted areas 
• Strengthened communicable disease surveillance, detection, response 
NOTE: This is a non-exhaustive and summarized list; objectives vary between countries 
according to contextual and operational specificities 
Egypt Iraq Jordan * Lebanon Turkey Egypt Iraq Jordan * Lebanon Turkey 
20 m 18 m 
236 m 
394 m 
311 m 
11 m 12 m 
113 m 
168 m 
32 m 
* Jordan figures are pending review by the Government of 
Jordan and therefore may be subject to change in due course. 
* Jordan figures are pending review by the Government of 
Jordan and therefore may be subject to change in due course. 
NUMBER OF 
3RP PARTNERS 
NUMBER OF 
3RP PARTNERS 
OBJECTIVES OBJECTIVES 
2,902,000 
TOTAL APPEAL TOTAL APPEAL 
USD 979 million 
6,601,900 
USD 336 million

28 Regional Strategic Overview 29 
Regional Refugee & Resilience Plan (3RP) 2019-2020 
Regional Strategic Overview 
Regional Refugee & Resilience Plan (3RP) 2019-2020 
BASIC NEEDS 
SECTOR 
SHELTER 
SECTOR 
Regional Sector Response Summary Regional Sector Response Summary 
The Basic Needs sector will continue to prioritize and invest in 
transitioning towards self-reliance of refugees as well as aligning 
humanitarian systems with national systems of host countries. The 
latter focuses primarily on further harmonizing eligibility criteria and 
levels of assistance but will also trial shifting the delivery of humanitarian 
assistance to existing social assistance systems, where possible. 
The sector will maintain a high level of monetized assistance and 
remain a strong leader in fulfilling the 3RP partners’ Grand Bargain 
commitments. Cash assistance has been recognized and proven as a very 
efficient and effective way of delivering assistance to the most vulnerable 
and those with protection risks. Moreover, it has proven to show the best 
impact on the local economies of host countries. 
Wherever possible, country teams will enhance existing cash assistance 
systems to: become more collaborative along the lines of the LOUISE 
4 setup in Lebanon, the Emergency Social Safety Net (ESSN) and the 
Conditional Cash Transfer for Education (CCTE) programmes in Turkey 
and the Common Cash Facility in Jordan; and, become more financially 
inclusive, which will be another enabling factor towards self-reliance. 
Comprehensive vulnerability assessments will continue to support the 
interventions of the Basic Needs sector but will increasingly seek to be 
aligned with national systems - for example, with national household 
surveys for social protection purposes. 
Cash assistance will be complemented by a set of targeted non-food 
items (NFI) interventions to specific groups of beneficiaries in various 
settings. In particular, due to the increased vulnerability of Syrian refugee 
families in the cold winter months, winter programmes will be a vital part 
of the response across the region, supplementing the assistance outlined 
above. While winter assistance will be cash-based where possible and 
appropriate, it will also include the distribution of NFIs and clothes. 
In addition to individual assistance, winter programming by 3RP partners 
includes synergies with other sectors, such as engineering work in camps 
and settlements for flood mitigation and drainage, and other work to 
weatherproof and improve shelters ahead of the winter season. 
The Syria crisis continues to place a massive strain on the host country 
economies and infrastructure across the region. In the shelter sector, this 
is particularly noticeable in terms of housing, as well as related facilities 
including water and sanitation and solid waste management. Some 93 
per cent of Syrian refugees in the region (almost 5.3 million) live in host 
communities in urban, peri-urban and rural areas while around 7 per cent 
(376,000) live in camps. 
The shelter situation for refugees living in host communities varies 
greatly. Some live in rented accommodation or stay with relatives, while 
others are living in unsatisfactory conditions in unfinished buildings, 
garages, worksites or informal settlements often without the necessary 
privacy required to prevent protection risks for girls and women, 
particularly if they are head of the household and/or have a disability. 
The shelter strategy aims to improve the living conditions of refugees 
and host community members living in temporary or substandard 
accommodation. This includes through the provision of weatherproofing, 
insulation and repair kits for refugees living in host communities in 
Lebanon and Iraq and the upgrade of tented accommodation for refugees 
in camps in Iraq. It also includes the improvement of infrastructure and 
amenities in camps, informal settlements and neighborhoods - including 
roads and drainage. 
Across the region, the shelter sector is increasingly focused on supporting 
national organizations and institutions in their response to the protracted 
needs of refugees both in and out of camps. In Iraq, for example, the 
sector will work with national actors (municipalities, government 
technical departments, local NGOs) to handover camp management as 
part of the settlement strategy, one of the purposes of which is to enable 
refugees to obtain permanent shelter solutions while transforming the 
camps into integrated establishments within the host community, which 
have access to national services. 
Funding for shelter activities remains a challenge to the full 
implementation of the strategy. 
16 
6 
8 
23 
21 
28 
Egypt Iraq Jordan Lebanon Turkey Egypt Iraq Jordan Lebanon Turkey 
85 % 
of the registered Syrian refugees 
in Egypt are unable to meet their 
basic needs. 
only 6 % 
of Syrian refugees in Lebanon 
and only 20 % in Jordan have 
a rental contract for 
their accommodation. 
TARGETED POPULATION 
REQUIREMENTS 
TARGETED POPULATION 
REQUIREMENTS 
• Enhancing the capacities of vulnerable families to improve living conditions, 
meet primary domestic needs, and reinforce their ability to withstand difficult 
economic conditions 
• Strengthening local and national capacities to respond to the increased demand 
for basic and municipal services 
NOTE: This is a non-exhaustive and summarized list; objectives vary between countries 
according to contextual and operational specificities 
• Ensuring sustainable and gender appropriate access to adequate shelter and 
infrastructure in camps and non-camp settings 
• Where relevant, providing camp coordination and management support to the 
local government 
NOTE: This is a non-exhaustive and summarized list; objectives vary between countries 
according to contextual and operational specificities 
Egypt Iraq Jordan * Lebanon Turkey Egypt Iraq Jordan * Lebanon Turkey 
55 m 115 m 151 m 
440 m 
746 m 
24 m 
51 m 
66 m 
* Jordan figures are pending review by the Government of 
Jordan and therefore may be subject to change in due course. 
* Jordan figures are pending review by the Government of 
Jordan and therefore may be subject to change in due course. 
NUMBER OF 
3RP PARTNERS 
NUMBER OF 
3RP PARTNERS 
OBJECTIVES OBJECTIVES 
4,449,100 
TOTAL APPEAL TOTAL APPEAL 
USD 1.5 billion 
314,900 
USD 142 million 
NOTE: The decision to report on ESSN and food assistance in Turkey as part of the 
Basic Needs Sector has increased the Basic Needs Sector’s overall figures compared to last year. 
19 
12

30 Regional Strategic Overview 31 
Regional Refugee & Resilience Plan (3RP) 2019-2020 
Regional Strategic Overview 
Regional Refugee & Resilience Plan (3RP) 2019-2020 
The overarching goal of the Water, Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH) sector 
is to continue to pursue of more sustainable WASH services to achieve 
durable results in a cost-effective manner. It also includes strengthening 
service providers’ equity drive in areas with a sizeable proportion of 
refugees living in host communities. 
In camps and informal settlements, refugees are supported by WASH 
interventions in Lebanon, Turkey, Iraq and Jordan. Refugees living in 
host communities, which in some towns represent a large proportion of 
the total population, continue to exert pressure on water, sanitation and 
waste management services. This pressure has been partly alleviated 
through interventions and support from WASH sector partners. 
With further declines in the overall funding situation, in addition to other 
factors, the WASH situation for Syrian refugees in camps and informal 
settlements continues to be difficult. Furthermore, the funding situation 
remains a key constraint for sector efforts to expand and improving WASH 
service delivery in some host communities. Meanwhile, policy challenges 
remain across the region. 
Despite the funding challenges, there were no major disease outbreaks in 
2018, while the sector was able to maintain services for refugees in camps 
and informal settlements in addition to making modest progress in host 
communities. 
The WASH Sector continues to adopt the principles of the Dead Sea 
Resilience Agenda. In camps, this includes, for example, completing 
transition to permanent and sustainable water, sanitation and waste 
management solutions when possible; ensuring quality standards 
are met; and emphasizing and empowering self-sufficiency where 
communities take charge of service provision. 
Furthermore, at host community level, the sector will continue 
supporting service providers to adapt to the increased service demand 
through several means including capacity strengthening and service 
delivery (upgrading and expanding service coverage and improving 
service efficiencies). 
Considering the relatively high unemployment rates across the region, 
providing access to income generating activities to improve the 
livelihoods of Syrian refugees and vulnerable host community members 
is crucial in reducing poverty, mitigating dependency on humanitarian 
aid, reducing inter-communal tension and promoting social cohesion, 
and increasing self-sufficiency. 
During 2018, there was an increase in the implementation of cash-forwork 
and temporary employment programmes that have targeted 
vulnerable refugee and host community households. However, the sector 
remains chronically underfunded (only 24 per cent of requirements as of 
end September 2018), preventing sector partners from delivering at scale. 
In 2019, sector priorities include: 1) income generating activities (i.e. self/ 
wage employment opportunities) – including short-term cash for work 
for refugees and host community members; 2) increased employability 
through skills development, vocational and language training; 3) job 
matching and strengthening of national employment systems; and 4) 
improved business environments and working conditions, including 
value chain upgrading, access to credit and markets, and assistance to 
micro, small and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs). 
On social stability and cohesion, tensions between refugees and host 
communities remains an area of concern and requires increased focus. 
Among other factors, slow economic growth has resulted in limited 
new jobs, and as a result, vulnerable members of host communities 
can perceive refugees as competition for the limited available jobs. In 
Lebanon, for example, a periodic survey found that although the levels 
of social tension have remained relatively stable over the past year, there 
are increasing signs of host community fatigue and decreased levels of 
interaction between the host communities and refugees. Sector partners 
are committed to promoting social cohesion between refugees and 
host community members through community-based interventions in 
partnership with local and municipal institutions 
Throughout 2019, sector partners are committed to increasing female 
and youth access to livelihoods activities and participation in social 
cohesion activities. 
4 16 
43 
107 
42 46 
Egypt Iraq Jordan Lebanon Turkey Egypt Iraq Jordan Lebanon Turkey 
Regional Sector Response Summary Regional Sector Response Summary 
LIVELIHOODS & 
SOCIAL COHESION SECTOR 
WATER, SANITATION AND 
HYGIENE (WASH) SECTOR 
In Iraq, refugee camps safe drinking 
water provision exceeded the 
WASH sector minimum standard of 
5 0 litres per person per day. 
Around USD 1.6 million 
in cash grants was disbursed to 
businesses in Lebanon to provide 
liquidity for new investments. 
TARGETED POPULATION 
REQUIREMENTS 
2,119,800 
TARGETED POPULATION 
REQUIREMENTS 
LABOUR MARKET ACCESS 
The Government of Jordan has increasingly opened its labour 
market to refugees in line with commitments made and reaffirmed 
at the London and Brussels conferences. As a result, a significant 
number of refugees have obtained work permits in several 
sectors - such as agriculture, manufacturing, and construction - in 
qualified industrial zones which contribute to their self-sufficiency 
and domestic consumption of goods and services. 
• Ensuring timely, equitable and sustainable access to a sufficient quantity of safe 
water to meet basic drinking, cooking and personal hygiene needs 
• Ensuring equitable and sustainable access to culturally, gender appropriate, 
safe sanitation facilities and services 
• Enabling good hygiene practice in order to ensure health, dignity and well-being 
• Reducing risk of WASH-related diseases 
NOTE: This is a non-exhaustive and summarized list; objectives vary between countries 
according to contextual and operational specificities 
• Increasing availability of information to allow for evidence-based interventions 
(including market assessments) 
• Improving economic opportunities for affected populations 
• Improving employability through enhancement of marketable skills 
OBJECTIVES OBJECTIVES 
NOTE: This is a non-exhaustive and summarized list; objectives vary between countries 
according to contextual and operational specificities 
Egypt Iraq Jordan * Lebanon Turkey Egypt Iraq Jordan * Lebanon Turkey 
19 m 35 m 
218 m 
17 m 
72 m 
360 m 
234 m 
TOTAL APPEAL TOTAL APPEAL 
* Jordan figures are pending review by the Government of 
Jordan and therefore may be subject to change in due course. 
* Jordan figures are pending review by the Government of 
Jordan and therefore may be subject to change in due course. 
NUMBER OF 
3RP PARTNERS 
NUMBER OF 
3RP PARTNERS 
USD 271 million 
850,200 
USD 685 million 
17

A home-based business in Ramtha employs Jordanian and Syrian 
women in two shifts. The women produce a number of dairy 
products, including Jameed. 
3RP APPEALING 
PARTNERS 
ABAAD - Resource Centre for Gender Equality 
Action contre la Faim (ACF) 
ActionAid 
Adventist Development and Relief Agency (ADRA) 
Agency for Technical Cooperation and Development (ACTED) 
Akkar Network For Development (AND) 
Al Fayhaa Association 
Al Majmoua Lebanese Association for Development 
Al Mithaq 
Alianza por la Solidaridad (APS) 
ALLC IH 
Al-Maqdese for Society Development (MSD) 
Alpha 
AMEL Association - Lebanese Popular Association for Popular Action 
American Near East Refugee Aid (ANERA) 
AND 
ANERA 
Arcenciel 
arche noVa 
ARCS 
ARCS – Arci Cultura e Sviluppo 
AVSI - The Association of Volunteers in International Service 
Basmeh wa Zeitooneh (B&Z) 
BFC 
Bojeen 
British Council 
CARE International 
Caritas 
Catholic Relief Services (CRS) 
CCP JAPAN 
Center for Victims of Torture (CVT) 
CESVI - Cooperazione e Sviluppo 
CHF - Global Communities 
CISP 
CLDH 
Comitato Internazionale per lo Sviluppo dei Popoli (CISP) 
Common Effort Organization 
CONCERN 
COSPE 
Cure Violence 
Danish Refugee Council (DRC) 
Dar Al Fatwa (DAF) 
DOT Lebanon 
EDF 
ERC 
Expertise France 
Fair Trade Lebanon 
FARD 
Finn Church Aid (FCA) 
Fondation Mérieux 
Food & Agricultural Organization (FAO) 
Fundacion Promocion Social de la Cultura (FPSC) 
Gruppo di Volontariato Civile (GVC) 
Habitat For Humanity 
Handicap International (HI) 
Heartland Alliance International (HAI) 
HelpAge International 
Himaya Daee Aataa (HDA) 
House of Peace 
Humedica 
ICU 
IECD 
IFE-EFI 
Institute for Development, Research, Advocacy and Applied Care (IDRAAC) 
International Alert 
International Catholic Migration Commission (ICMC) 
International Federation of Red Cross 
International Labour Office (ILO) 
International Medical Corps (IMC) 
International Organization for Migration (IOM) 
International Orthodox Christian Charities (IOCC) 
International Relief and Development (IRD) 
International Rescue Committee (IRC) 
INTERSOS 
Islamic Relief Worldwide (IRW) 
Japan Campaign for children of Palestine (CCP) 
Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) 
JEN 
Jordan Health Aid Society International (JHASi) 
Jordan Paramedic Society (JPS) 
KAFA Enough Violence and Exploitation 
KnK Children without Borders 
Lebanese Council to Resist Violence against Woman (LECORVAW) 
Lebanese Society For Educational and Social Development (LSESD) 
Lebanon Support 
Legal Action Worldwide (LAW) 
Lutheran World Federation (LWF) 
MAG 
MAGNA 
Makassed 
Makhzoumi Foundation 
MDSF 
MEDAIR 
Médecins du Monde (MdM) 
Medical Aid for Palestinians (MAP) 
MENA Organization for Services, Advocacy, Integration and Capacity building (MOSAIC) 
Mennonite Central Committee (MCC) 
Mercy Corps 
Mercy USA 
Mercy Without Limits 
Middle East Children’s Institute (MECI) 
mosaic-mena 
MSD 
MTI 
Muslim Aid (MA) 
NEF Near East Foundation (NEF) 
Nippon International Cooperation for Community Development (NICCOD) 
Norwegian Refugee Council (NRC) 
ODAlb 
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) 
Oxfam 
PLAN International 
Polish Center for International Aid (PCPM) 
Première Urgence-Aide Médicale Internationale (PU-AMI) 
PWJ 
QANDIL 
Qatar Red Crescent (QRC) 
RDFL 
REACH 
Red Oak 
Relief International (RI) 
Rene Moawad Foundation (RMF) 
Restart Center for Rehabilitation of Victims of Violence and Torture 
RET Liban 
Right to Play 
RNVDO 
Royal Health Awareness Society (RHAS) 
RtP 
Rwanga 
Safadi Foundation 
SAMS 
Save the Children International (SCI) 
SAWA 
SAWA Group 
SBOverseas 
SDAid 
Search for Common Ground (SFCG) 
Secours Islamique France (SIF) 
SeraphimGLOBAL 
SFO 
shareQ 
SHEILD - Social, Humanitarian, Economical Intervention for Local Development 
Solidar Suisse 
Solidarités International (SI) 
Sonbola Group for Education and Development 
SPARK 
Swiss Church Aid (HEKS/EPER) 
Tabitha-Dorcas 
Tahaddi Lebanon 
Teach for Lebanon 
Terre des Hommes (TDH) 
Terre des Hommes Italia (TDH Italy) 
The Lebanese Organization for Studies and Training (LOST) 
Un Ponte Per (UPP) 
UNESCO 
Union of Relief and Development Association (URDA) 
United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) 
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) 
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) 
United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN Women) 
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) 
United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat) 
United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO) 
United Nations Office for Project Services (UNOPS) 
United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) 
United Nations Relief and Works Agency (UNRWA) 
Vento di Terra 
Vision Hope International (VHI) 
War Child Canada 
War Child Holland 
War Child UK 
WCH 
Welthungerhilfe 
World Food Programme (WFP) 
World Health Organization (WHO) 
World Rehabilitation Fund (WRF) 
World Relief Germany 
World Vision International (WVI) 
Youth for Development (YFORD) 
@3RPSyria 
Follow us on Social Media 
@3RPSyria 
@3RPSyria 
Photo Credit 
Cover – Lebanon / UNHCR / Andy Hall 
Page 1 – Jordan / UNDP / Jared Kohler 
Page 2 – Jordan / UNHCR / Mohammad Hawari 
Page 6 – Lebanon / UNDP / Jared Kohler 
Page 19 – Lebanon / UNRWA / Rabie Akel 
Page 33 – Jordan / UNDP / Jared Kohler 
Design 
UNHCR / Julia Klement 
For further information please visit 
http://www.3rpsyriacrisis.org/

