. 01 
sudan 
Photo: UNAMID/ A.Gonzalez 
JAN 2017 
HUMANITARIAN 
STRATEGY 
multi-ye ar 
2017 - 2019 
Tawilla, North Darfur 
© UN agencies

02 . S U D A N 
E G Y P T 
L I BYA 
E T H I O P I A 
CHAD 
S O U T H S U DAN 
S AU D I A R A B I A 
C E N T R A L A F R I CAN 
R E P U B L I C 
E R I T R E A 
K E N YA 
DEMOCRAT I C R E P U B L I C 
O F T H E CONGO 
Abyei 
NORTHERN 
RIVER NILE 
RED SEA 
NORTH 
DARFUR 
NORTH 
KORDOFAN 
SOUTH 
DARFUR 
EAST 
DARFUR 
GEDAREF 
SOUTH 
KORDOFAN 
WEST 
KORDOFAN 
KASSALA 
SENNAR 
BLUE NILE 
WHITE 
NILE 
WEST 
DARFUR 
CENTRAL 
DARFUR 
AL GEZIRA 
KHARTOUM 
Khartoum 
R e d S e a

. 03 
Table of contents 
Foreword by Humanitarian Coordinator .................................................................. 04 
Foreword by HAC Commissioner General ............................................................... 05 
the multi-ye ar humantarian strategy 
Why a Multi-Year Humanitarian Strategy for Sudan .............................................. 06 
Scope and priorities ........................................................................................................... 07 
Enhancing the humanitarian-development-peace nexus .............................. 07 
Strengthening partnerships with and capacities of national actors ............ 07 
Predictability of humanitarian financing ................................................................. 08 
The Crisis: humanitarian needs 
Overview ................................................................................................................................... 09 
Planning assumptions ...................................................................................................... 09 
multi-ye ar humanitarian strategy 
outcomes 
Overview .............................................................................................................................. 11 
Outcome 1 ............................................................................................................................ 12 
Outcome 2 ............................................................................................................................ 12 
Outcome 3 ........................................................................................................................... 15 
coordination 
Strategy overview ............................................................................................................. 17 
Cross-cutti ng issues 
Centrality of Protection and Accountability ............................................................. 18 
Gender and age sensitive programming ................................................................... 18 
Environment ..................................................................................................................... 18 
monitoring and evaluation 
Monitoring ..................................................................................................................... 19 
Evaluation and continuous learning ................................................................. 19 
draft results framew ork

04 Forew ord by the humanitarian coordinator 
Forew ord by 
the humanitarian 
coordinator 
Ms. Marta Ruedas 
Resident and Humanitarian Coordinator 
For over 14 years, the humanitarian community in Sudan has provided life-saving assistance to people affected by conflict and 
natural disasters including those internally displaced and refugees fleeing from neighbouring countries. The humanitarian 
response has also helped to stabilise living conditions for millions of people in Darfur and other areas, and reduced mortality 
and morbidity. This Multi-Year Humanitarian Strategy – the first of its kind in Sudan – recognises that Sudan has both new 
crises and long-term humanitarian needs which require different types of interventions. It represents a commitment by 
the humanitarian community to better address the long-term needs and to work towards a sustainable reduction in needs, 
vulnerabilities and risk. At the same time, life-saving interventions to respond to new crises will be prioritised in line with 
humanitarian principles. 
This approach will advance the commitments made at the World Humanitarian Summit to pursue a New Way of Working that 
better integrates the humanitarian and development workstreams to strengthen the humanitarian-development nexus as part 
of the Grand Bargain; and brings together humanitarian partners and donors to pursue multi-year humanitarian planning in 
support of this objective. 
Though the intention of this multi-year approach is to take a first step towards putting some of the humanitarian caseload on 
the road towards a more developmental approach, humanitarian needs in Sudan remain significant, with 4.8 million people in 
need of assistance this year, including 2.3 million IDPs. Millions of people are facing food insecurity and acute malnutrition. 
Over 400,000 refugees have arrived from South Sudan since 2013 with over 85,000 arriving in the first three months of this year, 
and this number is expected to grow. While a robust humanitarian response will continue to be essential - especially in Central 
Darfur, South Kordofan and Blue Nile – much of this population is also in need of greater development assistance in order for 
some of the structural underpinnings of the issues to be addressed. 
The strategy will be linked to the UNDAF – the UN’s development plan – at the outcome and output levels, enhancing 
alignment between humanitarian and development goals. Humanitarian partners have already been implementing projects that 
address long-term displacement and build resilience and in 2016 started to shift to a vulnerability-based approach rather than 
targeting based on status. Building on this approach, this strategy will lay the foundations for durable solutions for displaced 
persons - both internally displaced persons and refugees - in line with international normative frameworks. 
We have developed the strategy – that will be complemented with annual response plans and budgets – in close cooperation 
with the Government of Sudan and our national and international partners. Our collective efforts will also be required to 
implement it successfully. The strategy is in line with the broader vision of the Government to promote stability, reduce 
vulnerability and enhance resilience. We will also work to strengthen the capacities of national actors, including in preparedness 
and early warning. Government support and facilitation of humanitarian activities is critical to the success of this strategy. The 
continued support of donors, including the flexibility to make multi-year funding commitments and to scale up support for 
development activities, is also critical. 
Through these efforts, we are committed to ensuring an efficient, sustainable and principled humanitarian response to those in 
need. 

forew ord by the humanitarian aid commissioner general 05 
forew ord by 
the humanitarian aid 
commissioner general 
H.E. Mr. Ahmed Mohamed Adam 
Humanitarian Aid Commissioner General 
The Multi-Year Humanitarian Strategy (2017-2019) constitutes an important step for the humanitarian response in Sudan. For 
the first time, humanitarian action will be guided by a strategy looking three years ahead. This will allow for strengthening the 
links between emergency humanitarian response and the longer-term development necessary to sustainably reduce the level of 
needs in Sudan. 
The past year has witnessed continued progress towards peace and stability presenting greater opportunities for development 
interventions, while humanitarian needs are driven by climatic factors and poverty, strengthening development activities is 
essential to addressing the underlying causes. 
By taking a multi-year approach and providing clear links to the Government and UN’s planned development outcomes 
in Sudan, this strategy will enable the humanitarian response to be adapted to the need for longer-term planning and the 
promotion of sustainable development. Ultimately, it should help to reduce the need for external humanitarian assistance. 
This strategy is a product of collaboration and consultation between the Government, United Nations and Partners. It 
contributes to national priorities and strategies. In addition, it provides the opportunity to further strengthen government 
collaboration and partnership with the UN and partners in Sudan over the coming three years. Such partnership is vital to 
ensuring people in need receive humanitarian assistance and protection in a timely and sustained manner. 
The strategy ensures that the range of humanitarian response builds capacity at all levels for both Government and national 
partners, including local communities, civil society, and local and national institutions. In cooperation with development 
actors, national capacity for early warning and recovery will also be strengthened. Together, this will help to strengthen 
national response mechanisms, better coordinate humanitarian response with national service delivery, and ultimately reduce 
dependence on aid. 
The Government of Sudan is committed to facilitate the implementation of this strategy, to enhance the effectiveness of the 
humanitarian response, while seeking to advance durable solutions for the displaced population, and promoting sustainable 
development for all Sudanese, including the most vulnerable. We hope this Strategy will provide an example which can benefit 
other countries in the region and beyond. 
We thank donors for their continued support and count on their commitment to provide multi-year humanitarian funding, as 
well as greater development funding, in areas with humanitarian needs.I would also like to thank all those who contributed to 
the preparation of the strategy in particular the Government National Mechanism and the United Nations. I look forward to our 
continued active partnership to serve all the people in Sudan in need of humanitarian assistance and development intervention.

06 the multi-ye ar humanitarian strategy 
the multi-ye ar 
humanitarian strategy 
This Multi-Year Humanitarian Strategy is a commitment by the international humanitarian community 
in Sudan, in line with the Government quarter century strategy and the Government third five-year 
plan, to deliver a more appropriate humanitarian response to both emergency and long-term needs 
across the country, in line with humanitarian principles. Planning beyond annual cycles will allow 
for better preparedness and a stronger evidence base for humanitarian activities. It will also improve 
collective accountability to affected people by investing in sustainable approaches that enable a 
gradual transition to durable solutions and development. Multi-year planning will also increase 
humanitarian actors’ accountability to all stakeholders, including the government, donors and 
implementing partners, by maximising the impact of available financial resources. This strategy is a 
commitment to the people of Sudan to shift from saving lives to reducing needs and vulnerabilities 
and creating the basis for early recovery and durable solutions. 
WHY A MULTI-YEAR HUMANITARIAN STRATEGY 
FOR SUDAN ? 
Since the beginning of the humanitarian crisis in Sudan, the 
humanitarian community has provided life-saving assistance 
to people affected by conflict and natural disasters and 
stabilized the living conditions of millions of people in Darfur 
and other areas. Material and protection assistance has been 
provided to a long-term refugee population and internally 
displaced persons (IDPs), reducing mortality and morbidity 
and preventing a spillover effect and further displacement 
abroad. At the same time, humanitarian assistance has 
been extended to people affected by chronic development 
challenges and limited access to basic services and assets. 
While this has prevented people from slipping below 
emergency thresholds, it has not addressed the underlying 
vulnerabilities, and assistance has been inadequate. 
Challenges in predicting the extent of conflict, its impact and 
the resolution thereof have contributed to these shortcomings. 
It is hoped that the long-term and strategic interventions 
and the support provided by all stakeholders outlined in this 
strategy will help to address these issues. Since 2004, funding 
requests for humanitarian assistance in Sudan have varied 
from US$700,000 to $2.1 billion annually. In the last five years 
alone, donors have generously provided at least $3.2 billion1 to 
consolidated humanitarian response plans. 
The shift to a Multi-Year Humanitarian Strategy is supported 
by the recognition that Sudan has new and long-term 
humanitarian needs. Across Darfur and the Two Areas, 
unilateral ceasefires have been announced, which have mostly 
held. Across Darfur, the main armed groups are largely 
absent on the ground, but in the Jebel Marra area, some 
armed groups are present. An improved security situation 
has provided the impetus for some returns, both from Chad 
and from within Darfur. There is also renewed hope for 
further returns, should the overall security situation stabilise 
further. Even then, the overall volatility of the situation 
and some inter-communal clashes and general banditry in 
Darfur have the potential to contribute to new crises or new 
displacement. The priority in any new crisis would be to save 
lives. Addressing the long-term humanitarian needs on the 
other hand requires longer planning horizons, and integrated 
and multi-sectoral strategies. The 2016 Humanitarian 
Response Plan (HRP) for Sudan incorporated such strategies, 
for example, the HCT Darfur Protracted Displacement 
Strategy (PDS), the Sudan National IDP Policy, and the 
Multi-Sectoral Response Strategy for return and reintegration. 
1Figures based on OCHA Financial Tracking Service 
Required Funded 
0.0 
0.5 
1.0 
1.5 
2.0 
2.5 
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 
$billion 
2015 2016 
Figures before 2011 include 
South Sudan 
$1.5bn 
$2.1bn 
$0.9bn 
$0.5bn 
Requirements vs. funding 2004 - 2016 

the multi-ye ar humanitarian strategy 07 
Longer planning horizons will allow partners to strengthen 
programming for example by investing in more robust 
assessments and designing sustainable approaches in support 
of government efforts both at federal and local levels. 
This Multi-Year Humanitarian Strategy will allow 
humanitarian programming to include learning and capture 
good practices that can be replicated and scaled up as 
appropriate to boost capacity to provide life-saving assistance 
and lay the foundations for recovery and development. 
At the same time, the strategy will facilitate engagement 
with development and peacebuilding partners to address 
the drivers of vulnerabilities, underlying structural issues 
across the country and the root causes of conflict. As such, 
humanitarian programming will make a concrete and 
measurable contribution to sustainable development in 
Sudan. This is in line with global thinking around a New Way 
of Working and the humanitarian-development nexus, that 
humanitarian and development actors, donors, and Member 
States committed to at the World Humanitarian Summit in 
May 2016. 
Scope and Priorities 
Results Framework: 
Outcomes with three-year targets 
Outputs with annual targets 
HRP 2017 HRP 2018 HRP 2019 
2017 - 2019 
MULTIYEAR HUMANITARIAN 
STRATEGY 
Annual 
update on 
needs, 
activities, 
budgets, 
targets 
Annual 
update on 
needs, 
activities, 
budgets, 
targets 
Annual 
update on 
needs, 
activities, 
budgets, 
targets 
This strategy provides the overarching framework for 
humanitarian response in Sudan for three years from 2017 
to 2019. The annual Humanitarian Needs Overview (HNO) 
will continue to provide the basis for humanitarian activities, 
identifying key humanitarian issues and severity of needs 
across the country. The strategy will be operationalized 
through annual HRPs presenting updates on strategies 
(rooted in good practice), activities, financial requirements 
and targets. The annual analysis and planning process will 
remain instrumental to bring all partners together, take stock 
of progress made against planned results and enable annual 
joint analysis of needs and joint work planning. During these 
three years, humanitarian partners will monitor and evaluate 
progress against the outcomes identified in this strategy, 
which will help to further shape and improve annual planning 
and to refine the strategy. Periodic reviews of the severity of 
needs will provide the basis for a rigorous prioritization of 
humanitarian activities. 
The multi-year planning process will allow for the 
identification of gaps, synergies and potential integration 
with the 2018-2021 United Nations Development Assistance 
Framework (UNDAF). The success of this Multi-Year 
Humanitarian Strategy will depend on the engagement 
and commitment of a broad range of actors (development, 
government, donors, political and peacebuilding partners). 
The outcomes and outputs under the strategy focus on 
providing (i) life-saving assistance to people newly displaced 
by conflict or natural disasters, responding to disease 
outbreaks, large scale flooding or droughts. Investment in 
preparedness to mitigate the impact of disasters and enable 
a timely response will also be made; (ii) improved and 
sustainable access to basic services and enhanced self-reliance 
for population groups affected by displacement, and (iii) 
addressing food insecurity, malnutrition and increasing 
resilience. Humanitarian programming will also contribute to 
ensuring durable solutions for IDPs, refugees, returnees and 
host communities. 
Enhancing the humanitariandevelopme 
nt-peace nexus 
In line with the former UN Secretary General’s report 
following the World Humanitarian Summit, ‘One Humanity, 
Shared Responsibility’ (2016) and the core responsibilities of 
leaving no-one behind and working differently to end need, 
development and humanitarian partners in Sudan commit 
to strategic collaboration and coordination in planning, 
implementing and monitoring the humanitarian response. 
The strategy has been developed in close consultation with 
the Government of Sudan and all humanitarian stakeholders 
as well as the team developing the 2018-2021 UNDAF, taking 
into consideration the Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper 
(currently being finalized while the interim one is the basis 
for this document), the Sustainable Development Goals 
(SDGs) and working in close coordination with development 
partners and the donor community. Departing from the linear 
approach that humanitarian programming can transition 
to development programming, this strategy is based on 
the understanding that humanitarian, development and 
peacebuilding interventions need to occur simultaneously in 
order to be effective. Where opportunities exist, humanitarian 
and development partners will aim to ensure that short, 
medium and long-term programming is coherently aligned to 
provide more durable and sustainable assistance to vulnerable 
households and communities in order to more effectively 
reduce needs and vulnerability and build resilience.

08 the multi-ye ar humanitarian strategy 
Strengthening part nerships with and capacities 
of national actors 
Capacity building for partners and government counterparts 
(local communities, civil society, local and national 
institutions) will be prioritized across the response in order 
to strengthen national response mechanisms and ensure the 
sustainability of the response, including greater integration 
of refugee and IDP assistance within national social service 
systems. Capacity building will also help stakeholders to 
better manage crises and become more resilient to shocks, 
in cooperation with development actors. Engagement 
with communities and their governance structures will be 
reinforced to ensure that services are sustainable beyond 
humanitarian interventions, and that representatives of both 
sexes and all ages and other relevant segments of communities 
are involved in the design, delivery and monitoring of 
services. Investment in local infrastructure and services will 
support host communities and strengthen local capacity to 
absorb and integrate internally displaced people, refugees and 
asylum seekers. 
Predictability of humanitarian financing 
Under this Multi-Year Humanitarian Strategy, efforts will 
be made to ensure that funding reaches people in need 
more rapidly. A longer planning horizon and timely project 
inception, combined with longer implementation periods 
where possible, will support more meaningful community 
engagement and capacity building of national counterparts. 
The humanitarian community in Sudan is advocating with 
donors to support this strategy by promoting multi-year 
commitments or funding with their capitals, in the spirit 
of the 2016 Grand Bargain and the New Way of Working 
agreed at the World Humanitarian Summit. This will lead to 
improved predictability of funding streams and will ultimately 
enable humanitarian partners to work towards the vision 
spelled out in this strategy. 
In order to address the drivers of chronic humanitarian needs, 
funding for development programming needs to be scaled 
up. The humanitarian community is also advocating for a 
broader range of financing options, including by multilateral 
development banks, to address the underlying drivers of 
humanitarian need. 
Strategic use of the Sudan Humanitarian Fund (SHF) 
In 2017, the SHF is aligning its allocation strategy with 
the Multi-Year Humanitarian Strategy. Approximately $5 
million of the $21 million will be earmarked for two-year 
projects. The SHF continues to promote multi-sectoral 
and area-based approaches to ensure that needs are 
addressed in a comprehensive and transparent manner. 
Some projects will target returnee populations and link 
with social cohesion and sustainable livelihoods activities 
under the Darfur Community Peace and Stability Fund 
(UN DCPSF) as well as basic services and governance 
activities (UN Darfur Fund). Other projects will focus on 
IDPs in long-term displacement, including multi-purpose 
cash interventions and a focus on livelihood support in line 
with the Protracted Displacement Strategy. 
© UN agencies

sudan: humanitarian needs 09 
sudan: 
humanitarian needs 
OVERVIEW 
Sudan faces two major overlapping humanitarian challenges: 
while the security situation has improved, as long as nonresolution 
of the conflict continues, localised conflict is likely 
to lead to new displacement. Another challenge is due to 
climatic and socio-cultural conditions leading to crisis levels 
of food insecurity and malnutrition. The scale and long-term 
nature of displacement, and the sudden demographic shift 
and urbanization in the major cities, especially in Darfur, 
which has not been matched by economic opportunities, has 
exposed displaced people to hardship and uncertainty about 
their future. This is putting an additional strain on the 3.6 
million people currently suffering from food insecurity, and 
the 2.2 million children suffering from acute malnutrition. 
Refugees and asylum seekers living in both emergency 
and long-term situations remain largely dependent on 
humanitarian assistance, with very limited access to livelihood 
opportunities. 
In 2016, almost 159,000 people were newly displaced (and 
remain displaced) across Darfur, according to the UN 
and partners. Up to an additional 6,000 people were also 
reportedly displaced during the year, (in addition to about 
123,000 who were displaced in 2016 and have reportedly 
returned).2 This is in addition to an estimated 2.2 million 
IDPs who were in need of assistance in 2016. Displacement 
has been caused primarily by conflict in many parts of Sudan, 
and smaller-scale, inter-communal conflict related to access to 
land and natural resource management. 
In addition to internal displacement, Sudan has a 
longstanding tradition of hospitality towards refugees and 
asylum seekers, and is currently hosting refugees from the 
Central African Republic (CAR), Chad, Eritrea, Ethiopia, 
South Sudan, Syria and Yemen. As of December 2016, over 
793,700 asylum seekers and refugees are being hosted across 
Sudan. Voluntary repatriation is not an option for the vast 
majority of refugees due to the situation in their countries of 
origin. In view of the ongoing fighting in South Sudan and 
significant food insecurity, reaching the level of famine in 
certain locations, the number of refugees crossing into Sudan 
is likely to continue to grow. According to the Government 
of Sudan, there are over 700,000 South Sudanese refugees 
who have sought safety and protection in Sudan since 
December 2013 due to the progressive deterioration of the 
security situation in South Sudan, of whom 400,000 have been 
registered so far. 
Cyclical challenges (seasonal weather shocks and climate 
variability) and structural challenges (macro-economic 
instability, low-productivity livelihoods and poverty) result 
in crisis levels of food insecurity and chronic malnutrition. 
Over one in three children under five are too short for their 
age (stunted) and more than one in six are too thin for their 
height (wasted). According to the Ministry of Health, some 
2.2 million children suffer from wasting annually (Global 
Acute Malnutrition, GAM) out of which over 573,000 suffer 
from Severe Acute Malnutrition (SAM). Eleven out of the 
eighteen states have a malnutrition prevalence of above 15 
per cent, which is above the emergency threshold as per the 
WHO standards. Some states have much higher rates, such as 
North Darfur where GAM prevalence is at 27.9 per cent.3 
This is particularly significant in the east of Sudan, 
where chronic underdevelopment often results in acute 
humanitarian needs. The main contributing factors to these 
high levels of malnutrition are food insecurity, disease 
outbreaks, lack of access to primary healthcare and clean 
drinking water, inadequate sanitation facilities, and poor 
infant feeding practices. Both acute and chronic forms of 
undernutrition affect the growth, development and survival of 
children in Sudan. 
While challenges related to seasonality are not new, 
increasing climate variability and warming mean that shocks 
to agricultural livelihoods are increasing in frequency and 
intensity, extending lean seasons and creating situations where 
humanitarian assistance is needed. Opportunities for rural 
livelihoods are also diminished by increasing environmental 
degradation. The 2015-16 El Niño event which mainly 
affected people in already disadvantaged settings highlighted 
the high vulnerability of the people of Sudan to recurrent 
climate-related disasters. These cyclical challenges add to 
pervasive structural challenges due to economic hardships 
including inflation, short-term price volatility, limited social 
safety nets, and limited job generation initiatives. 
Planning Assumptions 
This three-year strategy is based on the assumption that 
the key drivers of humanitarian needs, both chronic and 
structural causes, and the likelihood of shocks will continue 
in the next three years. However, opportunities also exist 
emanating from the unilateral cessation of hostilities, the 
significant reduction of large scale armed conflict, the general 
disposition of IDPs to return under certain conditions, the 
2The number of people displaced in 2016 has increased since the 2017 HNO was finalized due to registration and verification of people displaced during 2016 (completed in early 2017). 
3UNDAF CCA, 2016.

10 sudan: humanitarian needs 
discussion with the US administration on lifting the sanctions 
and the conditions stipulated. Conditions include cessation of 
hostilities, free and unfettered humanitarian access, to name 
a few. Seasonal return continues to take place, in order for 
people to carry out cultivation and farming. 
Internal displacement: from 2017 to end 2019, displacement 
and return patterns will vary based on low intensity conflict 
and insecurity. With fighting still ongoing in Darfur, Blue 
Nile, South Kordofan and insecurity in Abyei, further 
displacement remains likely in 2017 and beyond. Since 2003, 
some 533,000 people have voluntarily returned, of whom 
209,000 since 2014. Investments in durable solutions for 
IDPs will gradually reduce the number of people affected by 
long-term displacement, while humanitarian partners remain 
prepared to deliver comprehensive emergency assistance to 
those newly displaced. 
Refugees: in 2016, over 131,000 refugees arrived from South 
Sudan – the highest number of refugees from any country. 
An additional 85,000 refugees arrived from January to end 
of March 2017. It is expected that by the end of 2017, the 
total number of refugees fom South Sudan since the onset of 
conflict in December 2013 will reach 477,000 mainly in South 
and East Darfur, South and West Kordofan, and White Nile, 
amid reports of an upsurge in armed conflict and emergency 
levels of food insecurity in areas of South Sudan near the 
Sudan border. UNHCR and partners are monitoring the 
situation closely and prepositioning emergency shelter and 
NFIs and scaling-up reception services to bolster the response. 
UNHCR registers refugees in 5 states. 
Malnutrition: undernutrition is one of Sudan’s most 
serious, but least addressed, socioeconomic and health 
problems. National malnutrition rates have not improved 
for the last 30 years, with stunting levels even showing an 
upward trend, reaching 38.2 % in 2014.4 In the absence of 
adequate investment to address the underlying causes of 
undernutrition, humanitarian actors will continue to provide 
humanitarian nutrition services to affected populations in 
2017. More generally, in a context shaped by insufficient basic 
services, humanitarian assistance will remain a lifeline to 
prevent people from slipping below emergency thresholds. 
Climate-related shocks and hazards: according to the 2017 
HNO, 3.6 million people are living at crisis or emergency 
levels of food insecurity. This represents a decrease of 1 
million people affected by food insecurity at the peak of the 
El Nino period in 2016. In contrast to alarming levels of food 
insecurity in neighbouring countries in the Horn of Africa, 
the forecast in Sudan for wheat to be harvested by March 2017 
is generally good, ensuring an adequate supply for Sudan’s 
population for 2017 nationally. Humanitarian partners will 
continue to closely monitor the situation. The frequency 
of seasonal floods has gradually increased in recent years, 
disproportionately impacting already vulnerable populations 
and creating additional humanitarian needs. 
Despite expected significant new humanitarian needs as 
spelled out above, there have been improvements in the 
security situation in Darfur that could facilitate development 
activities. It is for such situations that a New Way of Working 
was proposed at the World Humanitarian Summit. This 
strategy has been developed with the assumption that links 
to development programming can be strengthened over the 
coming three years. More sustainable approaches will further 
reduce the vulnerability of targeted populations and increase 
self-reliance, so that the need for humanitarian assistance will 
gradually decline. For 2017, this will require the identification 
of potential thematic or geographic areas that would allow for 
a sequencing and layering of humanitarian and development 
assistance and a scale-up of development assistance to 
gradually reduce vulnerabilities. 
Acknowledging the fast-changing environment in Sudan, the 
HCT and humanitarian stakeholders commit to periodically 
validate and/or review these assumptions as necessary to 
ensure the strategy remains relevant or is adapted to address 
any changes in the context. Activities under Outcome 1 will 
be rapidly scaled up as necessary in the event of emergencies 
or a deterioration of the humanitarian situation to ensure that 
timely life-saving assistance is prioritised and delivered at 
scale and as needed. 
4UNDAF CCA, 2016 

sudan: humanitarian needs 11 
© UN agencies 
The Refugee Response: moving toward a multi-year 
approach in Sudan 
Responding to the emergency needs of South Sudanese 
refugees remains a top priority. Having usually travelled 
long distances to seek safety and protection, they need 
protection, food, water, shelter, health and nutrition 
assistance as well as livelihood opportunities. In view of 
the ongoing fighting in South Sudan and significant food 
insecurity, reaching famine level in certain locations, 
the number of refugees crossing into Sudan is likely 
to continue to grow. As the South Sudanese refugee 
emergency enters its fourth year, there is a need to move 
beyond the emergency phase and focus on long-term 
solutions that strengthen the resilience of refugees and 
allow them to become more self-reliant in the face of a 
potentially protracted crisis. There are over 400,000 South 
Sudanese refugees who have sought safety and protection 
in Sudan since December 2013 due to the progressive 
deterioration of the security situation in South Sudan. 
A move to a multi-year strategy supports enhanced 
preparedness of the refugee response, with a view to 
preparing for the needs of anticipated new influxes in 2018 
and 2019. 
Refugees living in protracted situations in Darfur and 
eastern Sudan remain largely dependent on humanitarian 
aid, with a small percentage able to access livelihood 
opportunities. The majority of refugees in Sudan are 
living in chronic poverty, driven by a lack of livelihood 
opportunities, restriction of movement in some areas, high 
prices of local commodities, and limited access to land 
for farming. The ability of refugees to become self-reliant 
remains challenging, with most households unable to 
find work or forced to engage in casual labor on low and 
unreliable wages. The lack of livelihood opportunities 
also compounds protection issues, particularly for refugee 
women. 
Increasing numbers of mainly Eritrean refugees in eastern 
Sudan are turning to smuggling networks in order to 
facilitate their movement onward. Along these migratory 
routes, refugees and asylum-seekers risk exposure to 
various forms of exploitation, including human trafficking. 
Drivers of onward movement of refugees and asylum 
seekers living in protracted situations fall within a broader 
development context in Sudan. There is a need for more 
durable solutions that support the development of 
opportunities for refugees to gain greater self-reliance and 
enhanced protection, and these solutions require multiyear 
considerations and long-term planning. 

12 The MULTI-YEAR HUMANITARIAN Strategy OUTCO MES: 
The MULTI-YEAR HUMANITARIAN Strategy OUTCO MES: 
from saving lives 
to reducing needs 
& vulnerabilitieS & 
building resilience 
strategy overview 
The over-arching objective of this strategy is to protect the lives, security and integrity, as well as the fundamental wellbeing and 
dignity, of people affected by emergencies, including conflict. At the same time, self-reliance and resilience of affected people, in 
particular for those living in long-term crises, will be strengthened through further integrating an early recovery approach.5 The 
response will be anchored in humanitarian principles, International Humanitarian Law, International Human Rights Law and 
International Refugee Law. In order to ensure efficiency in achieving these outcomes, there is a dedicated commitment from 
humanitarian partners to use an integrated approach throughout the planning, implementation and monitoring phases of the 
strategy. 
By capitalizing on the impact of life-saving interventions and strategically linking the emergency response to resilience, 
development, and peacebuilding programming, the strategy aims at gradually reducing the number of people in Sudan who are 
in need of humanitarian assistance. In this regard, the Humanitarian Country Team has agreed on three strategic outcomes: 
5Guidance Note on Inter-Cluster Early Recovery, Global Cluster for Early Recovery, January 2016 
6“Productive capacities” as derived from UN Secretary-General’s report to ECOSOC, E/2012/74, 
encompass the productive resources, entrepreneurial capabilities and production linkages, which 
together determine the capacity of a country to produce goods and services in a way which 
achieves economic growth, poverty reduction and environmental sustainability. 
Multi-ye ar HUMANITARIAN STRATEGY Strategic Outcomes 
Outcome 1: Populations affected by natural 
or man-made disasters receive timely 
assistance during and in the aftermath of 
the shock 
Outcome 2: Displaced populations, 
refugees, returnees and host communities 
meet their basic needs and/or access 
essential basic services while increasing 
their self-reliance 
Outcome 3: Vulnerable residents in 
targeted areas have improved nutrition 
status and increased resilience 
UNDAF Strategic Outcomes 
Outcome 1: By 2021, people in Sudan, with 
emphasis on small producers and microentrepreneurs, 
have access to improved 
productive capacities6 that contribute to 
inclusive and sustainable livelihoods, job 
creation and ending extreme poverty 
Outcome 2: By 2021, people’s resilience 
to consequences of climate change, 
environmental stresses and natural hazards is 
enhanced through strengthened institutions, 
policies, plans and programmes 
Outcome 2: By 2021, people’s resilience 
to consequences of climate change, 
environmental stresses and natural hazards 
is enhanced through strengthened 
institutions, policies, plans and programmes 
Outcome 3: By 2021, the most vulnerable population have improved health, nutrition, 
education, water and sanitation, and social protection outcomes 
820 
Outcome 4: By 2021 national, state and local institutions are more effective to carry out 
their mandates including strengthening normative frameworks that respect human rights 
and fundamental freedoms and ensure effective service delivery 
75 
Outcome 5: By 2021, security and stabilization of communities affected by conflict 
are improved through utilization of effective conflict management mechanisms, peace 
dividends and support to peace infrastructures and durable solutions that augment 
peaceful coexistence and social cohesion

The MULTI-YEAR HUMANITARIAN Strategy OUTCO MES: 13 
outcome 1 
Populations affected by natural or man-made 
disasters receive timely assistance during and in the 
aftermath of a shock 
Until end 2019, humanitarian partners will work to ensure:7 
(i) Strengthened emergency response preparedness of 
humantarian actors; (ii) Affected people receive timely 
lifesaving assistance; (iii) Coping mechanisms are 
strengthened through integrated community-based early 
recovery programming. 
New emergencies will require providing emergency food 
assistance, increasing access to livelihoods to reduce negative 
coping strategies, attending to the critical needs of acutely 
malnourished children and pregnant and lactating women, 
providing shelter from the elements, and ensuring access to 
basic services such as education, health, nutrition, protection, 
water, sanitation and hygiene. Protection services are also 
required to identify and respond in a timely manner to people 
at risk of abuse or neglect, including women and children, 
older people and people with disabilities, and victims of 
explosive remnants of war. Additionally, newly displaced 
persons, returnees and refugees will also require timely 
access to registration and documentation services including 
protection from trafficking. During the emergency phase, 
humanitarian partners must make every effort to reassess the 
needs of vulnerable people and prioritize assistance, through 
vulnerability criteria, under Outcome 2 of this plan.8 
Under Outcome 1, humanitarian partners commit to 
improve the timeliness of the response to new emergencies. 
Collective investment in the capacity for situation and risk 
monitoring will help to improve regular evidence generation 
on the severity of needs across the country. Early warning 
information will enable a timely response as soon as new 
needs arise, and facilitate the adjustment of priorities as 
required. This will facilitate a seamless flow between alert, 
appeals for funding and action on the ground. The Minimum 
Operating Standards (MOS)9 and the Sudan Emergency 
Response Framework (ERF)10 will guide operations in the face 
of new shocks and risks and inform preparedness efforts for 
IDPs and resident populations, while the refugee response will 
be guided by UNHCR Emergency Standards and Indicators. 
Implementation of Emergency Response Preparedness 
(ERP) actions will help identify priority humanitarian risks 
in the country, determine the level of preparedness needed 
to respond, and identify gaps in the response system that 
need to be addressed. UNHCR’s Framework for Emergency 
Preparedness and Response Procedures will assist to 
identify the procedures needed, guide internal leadership, 
coordination arrangements and accountabilities during the 
pre-emergency phase and during the emergency. 
Emergency interventions will be linked to existing safety 
net platforms (including cash transfers, input subsidies, 
other livelihood initiatives and health insurance), which will 
provide a spring board to scale up the response and promote 
a continuum and alignment with development activities and 
partners. Close coordination with government counterparts 
and local partners will contribute to building the capacity 
of national partners and improving preparedness for new 
emergencies.11 
Link to development programming: 
Humanitarian activities aimed at providing assistance to 
communities affected by natural or climate-related shocks 
are aligned to UNDAF Outcome 2, which aims to increase 
resilience and risk management capacities at household, 
community and policy levels. Community-based activities 
under this UNDAF outcome (reduce conflict over natural 
resources, improve early warning systems and the capacity 
to prepare and respond to natural disasters) will target 
geographical areas and communities that also benefit from 
humanitarian assistance, including vulnerable resident 
communities hosting IDPs and refugees. Investments in early 
warning systems and capacity-building of national partners 
on Disaster Risk Management will be complemented by 
capacity building and readiness efforts, gradually reducing the 
need for large-scale humanitarian assistance in the aftermath 
of natural and climate-related shocks. Humanitarian actors 
are also advocating for development actors to step in earlier 
after an emergency to provide medium and long-term 
support to people affected by natural and man-made disasters 
to help reduce their dependence on humanitarian assistance 
and rebuild their self-reliance. 
outcome 2 
Displaced populations, refugees, returnees and host 
communities meet their basic needs and/or access 
essential basic services while increasing their selfreliance 
Until end 2019, humanitarian actors aim to ensure:12 (i) 
People have equal, sustainable access to essential assistance 
based on vulnerability targeting; (ii) People in need have 
equal, sustainable access to quality basic services; and 
(iii) People in need have access to income and livelihood 
opportunities. 
Over the last decade, new displacement, both temporary 
and long-term, has generally ranged between one and four 
hundred thousand people per year. In 2017, 2.3 million IDPs 
were estimated to be in need of humanitarian assistance 
in Sudan. This is in addition to over 790,000 refugees and 
asylum seekers in need. The spontaneous return of IDPs 
and Sudanese refugees mainly from Chad has taken place to 
7DRAFT Outcomes. Please refer to Results Framework and annual HRPs for target figures 
8Timespan of emergency interventions vary depending on the type of emergency and related guiding principles. The emergency phase of the response is usually 24 months for IDPs (WFP) 
and five years for refugees (UNHCR). 8 
9https://www.humanitarianresponse.info/en/operations/sudan/document/minimum-operating-standards-mos-full-enar 
10https://www.humanitarianresponse.info/en/operations/sudan/document/emergency-response-framework-erf-2015 
11In line with IASC Common Framework for Preparedness 
12Please refer to Results Framework

14 
locations where conditions have improved. Since the onset of 
the crisis in 2003, approximately 532,000 persons voluntarily 
returned to their places of origin across Sudan. However, due 
to unresolved land issues, ongoing insecurity and weak rule 
of law, large-scale sustainable returns have, for the most part, 
not yet taken place. This is further complicated by lack of 
access to basic services, natural assets and economically and 
environmentally sustainable livelihoods in areas of return. 
The long-term displacement situation is not only a highly 
destabilizing experience for the affected people, but also 
leads to very significant development challenges. Most IDPs, 
returnees and refugees are unable to meet their basic needs 
independently and have very limited livelihood opportunities. 
In addition, rapid population growth and displacement have 
altered the human geography and exerted stress on available 
natural and economic resources. Leaving IDPs in continued 
marginalization without the prospect of a durable solution is 
an obstacle to long-term peace, recovery and reconstruction. 
Early recovery and self-reliance interventions will therefore 
be increased and the dependence of people on emergency 
relief will progressively be reduced as early as possible. For 
refugees, only few opportunities to find a durable solution 
exist, despite their importance to guaranteeing safety and 
protection. The lack of long-term options contributes to the 
long-term nature of these emergencies and refugees finding 
often unsafe alternative solutions to ease their suffering. 
Investments in in-depth vulnerability assessments for IDPs 
have already helped to target assistance based on vulnerability 
and capacities where appropriate (see box). Through a rightsbased 
approach and based on outcomes from IDP intention 
surveys for return/reintegration, communities will be 
supported to regain their capacity to address their basic needs 
in an autonomous way, develop safety nets, and be integrated 
into the essential services provided by the government to its 
citizens. This requires that their access to essential services 
reaches appropriate standards and becomes sustainable, safe, 
and equitable with the rest of the population. 
Example: Investments in vulnerability assessments for 
IDPs to reduce dependence 
In-depth assessments are helping to target IDPs based 
on their capacities, needs and vulnerabilities rather than 
based on their status as IDPs, thereby supporting the shift 
away from annual blanket assistance for all long-term IDPs 
in Darfur. Beneficiaries are grouped in categories based 
on the severity of their vulnerability and then provided 
with targeted assistance, ranging from unconditional 
food assistance to livelihoods support and basic services. 
This will support IDPs to become more self-reliant and 
to gradually increase their productive assets. To date, 
vulnerability assessments have identified 333,000 IDPs 
as relatively better-off households. An additional 300,000 
IDPs have been transitioned to livelihood activities (or 
seasonal unconditional support). 
989,920 
853,000 
No data 
270,000 300,000 317,000 175,000 268,000 80,000 114,000 
380,000 430,000 
2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 
247,000 
2015 2016 
159,000* 
*2016 gures indicate veried displacement, not including reported displacement/returns. 
No. of people newly displaced per year 
(including verified, unverified and returns) 
Cash-based programming and use of technology 
The anticipated context during 2017 - 2019 will challenge the humanitarian community to address urgent needs and to 
foster more innovative approaches to strengthen self-reliance, adapt to evolving situations and to work across sectors. 
The Humanitarian Country Team recognises that the use of Cash-Based Transfer Programming (CTP) has the potential 
to provide a timely and cost efficient and effective response to a variety of urgent needs, offering dignity, flexibility and, 
depending on the modality, choice to beneficiaries while supporting local markets. Applied in the right context, CTP has the 
potential to facilitate and strengthen self-reliance, particularly for long-term displaced and refugee communities and hence 
offers an appropriate mechanism to link humanitarian and development programming. Where appropriate, cash and voucher 
transfer modalities will be considered to support or complement service-based safety net approaches, in coordination with 
government Ministry of Welfare and Social Security (MoWSS)-led social protection systems. In addition, the humanitarian 
community will enhance its capacity to monitor the impact in a coordinated manner using available new technologies. The 
Inter-Sector Coordination Group Cash Working Group (CWG) is co-chaired by WFP and the World Bank, extending the 
community of practice beyond humanitarian actors and ensuring humanitarian cash-based programming is informed by the 
broader work in Sudan on cash transfers and social safety nets. 
The MULTI-YEAR HUMANITARIAN Strategy OUTCO MES: 

15 
To provide a basis for long term solutions for IDPs in line 
with the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur (DDPD), 
recovery and development plans such as the Darfur 
Development Strategy and the UNDAF, and contributing 
to the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), different 
area-based and multi-sector approaches have already been 
developed and endorsed. The Humanitarian Country Team 
(HCT) Darfur Protracted Displacement Strategy (PDS) is an 
integral part of the Multi-Year Humanitarian Strategy. The 
PDS aims to strengthen IDP coping capacities and increase 
self-reliance as well as improve sustainable access to quality 
basic services for IDPs in camps and in host communities, and 
contributes to laying the foundation for Durable Solutions. 
While the PDS addresses displaced people’s needs and 
vulnerabilities in their places of displacement, the areabased 
Recovery, Return and Reintegration Sector (RRR) 
Multi-sectoral Response Strategy aims to address immediate 
needs and underlying vulnerabilities in areas of return and 
reintegration. The Strategy looks into new and innovative 
ways for humanitarian-development cooperation, including 
scaling up and coordinating early recovery efforts from both 
the development and humanitarian ends of the aid spectrum. 
The framework is based on the criteria13 and benchmarks 
for durable solutions set out in the Inter-Agency Standing 
Committee’s Framework on Durable Solutions for Internally 
Displaced Persons and on lessons learned from Sudan. It is 
one of three inter-linked and overlapping phases that cover 
immediate needs while at the same time addressing long-term 
needs necessary to allow people to permanently return to 
their places of origin. 
Ensuring the self-reliance of refugees remains challenging, 
with most households unable to find work or engaged in 
casual labour with low wages in relation to Sudan’s high cost 
of living. Investment in targeted livelihoods programming 
will form a key component of the Multi-Year Humanitarian 
Strategy in order to enhance the self-reliance and protect 
the fundamental well-being of refugees in Sudan. Increasing 
the resilience of host communities to absorb new influxes of 
displaced people, refugees and returnees is also necessary. 
Community support projects will be used to help to mitigate 
the impact of displacement on host communities by 
alleviating strains on local services and infrastructure. This 
will also significantly contribute to reconciliation and the 
inclusion of persons with specific needs, in turn promoting 
social cohesion and peaceful co-existence. The response 
will be in line with the Regional Refugee Response Plan for 
South Sudanese and the Joint Strategy to Address Human 
Trafficking, Kidnappings and Smuggling of Persons in Sudan. 
Link to development programming: 
Building on the humanitarian support within this 
outcome, related to UNDAF Focus Area 3, development 
programming will focus on providing or extending social 
services throughout Sudan, with IDPs, refugees and 
returnees identified as particularly vulnerable groups. Close 
coordination with government counterparts and local 
partners will contribute to building the capacity of national 
partners and improving preparedness for new emergencies, 
thereby directly contributing to UNDAF Outcome 4. The 
work on durable solutions for IDPs under the Multi-Year 
Humanitarian Strategy will be mirrored under UNDAF 
Outcome 5. 
Greater engagement of development actors within the 
refugee response in Sudan will also benefit host communities, 
especially as it relates to improved access to basic services 
Durable Solutions 
Within the Recovery, Returns and Reintegration Sector (RRR), humanitarian and development partners and authorities will 
coordinate their support to durable solutions for IDP and refugee returnees through a rights-based approach. Assessments 
in areas of return, local integration and resettlement will be carried out so as to ensure that the right of IDPs to make an 
informed and voluntary choice is fulfilled, and that conditions of safety and dignity are provided in areas where durable 
solutions are supported. Support to ensure rights related to access to land, to documentation, and ownership rights, must also 
be provided. To this end, the verification and assessment framework adopted by the RRR Sector comprises three steps: 
1. Verification of conditions of return to ensure voluntariness, safety and dignity 
2. Registration of returnees 
3. Technical assessments to inform evidence-based planning and multi-year/multi-sector response 
A mission completed by the Joint IDP Profiling Service in December 2016 in Sudan recommended that a comprehensive 
profiling exercise be carried out to provide an evidence base for more strategic joint programming for durable solutions. This 
should include consolidated thematic analysis of the different durable solutions criteria and analysis on IDPs’ perceptions 
and preferences for durable solutions, as well as analysis of the capacity of the surrounding environment to accommodate 
and support these solutions. Partners currently producing displacement-related data in the Sudan context, the World Bank 
and national authorities will reinforce their coordination to combine approaches into one joint profiling methodology. 
13Long-term safety, security and freedom of movement; Adequate standard of living, including at a minimum access to adequate food, water, housing, health care and basic education; 
Access to employment and livelihood opportunities; Access to mechanisms to restore housing, land and property or provide compensation; Access to and replacement of personal and other 
documentation; Voluntary reunification with family members separated during displacement; Participation in public affairs, at all levels, on an equal basis with the resident population; & 
Effective remedies for displacement-related rights violations, including access to justice, reparations and information on root causes. 
The MULTI-YEAR HUMANITARIAN Strategy OUTCO MES: 

16 
and livelihood opportunities for both refugees and host 
community members. Increasing the resilience of host 
communities to absorb new influxes of refugees also requires 
multi-year planning. Investments in social and physical 
infrastructure of host communities should seek to enhance the 
capacity of local service providers to deliver health, education, 
water, sanitation and protection services of good quality to all 
members of the community, and should also allow for nondiscriminatory 
access for refugees to these services. Doing so 
will also contribute significantly social cohesion and peaceful 
co-existence, as well as the inclusion of groups with specific 
needs into specialized services. 
Link to peace building and social cohesion: 
To contribute to peace building efforts so as to promote social 
cohesion among communities affected by long-term conflict, 
reduce vulnerability and ensure sustained access to basic 
services, humanitarian programmes will be implemented 
according to the “do no harm” principle, and will build 
on existing community-based mechanisms and systems. 
Proposed actions include the completion of joint conflict 
analyses, conflict-sensitive programming, the introduction 
of interventions for peace building and social cohesion in 
maximising existing network mechanisms such as childfriendly 
spaces in IDP and refugee sites, alternative learning 
programmes, and primary healthcare services in areas where 
tribal conflicts occur. The expansion of existing community 
centres and the creation of new centres will empower IDPs, 
refugees, returnees and host communities and provide safe 
public spaces for self-help among women, men, and youth, 
boys and girls. 
These interventions, strengthening the humanitariandevelopment-
peace nexus, will feed into Outcome 5 of the 
UNDAF. By 2021, security and stabilization of communities 
affected by conflict are improved through utilization of 
effective conflict management mechanisms, peace dividends 
and support to peace infrastructures and durable solutions 
that augment peaceful coexistence and social cohesion. 
outcome 3 
Vulnerable residents in targeted areas have 
improved nutrition status and increased resilience 
Until end 2019, humanitarian partners will work to ensure 
that:14 (i) Malnourished children, pregnant and lactating 
women and other vulnerable groups have access to nutritionsensitive 
and nutrition-specific services; (ii) Stakeholders 
and affected communities (national and state level) have 
improved capacity to prevent malnutrition in a multi-sectoral 
manner; (iii) The affected communities are empowered 
through community-based livelihood interventions and other 
prevention and resilience measures. 
In line with the Agenda for Humanity’s core responsibility 
4, work differently to end need, this strategic outcome 
acknowledges the fact that there are pockets of severe 
vulnerability across Sudan, even in areas that are not directly 
affected by conflict or natural disasters. Sudan has some of 
the highest malnutrition rates in the world, and in 2014, 52% 
of acutely malnourished children lived in states that are not 
affected by conflict.15 In the absence of sufficient access to 
basic services and without access to humanitarian assistance, 
vulnerable people drop below emergency nutrition thresholds. 
This is mainly hotspots for insecurity and natural disasters. 
Under Outcome 3, humanitarian actors will focus on local 
populations in targeted areas not affected by conflict based 
on their needs and vulnerabilities as identified in the annual 
HNO. In light of the economic situation across the country, 
there is an increased need to prevent larger segments of 
the population from falling into a spiral of negative coping 
mechanisms and thereby slipping into this category. While 
high levels of malnutrition represent the visible humanitarian 
consequence, undernutrition is the result of multiple 
underlying structural causes: food security, health, water and 
sanitation. The HCT’s multi-sector approach to addressing 
the emergency needs of malnourished children is designed to 
also contribute to the long-term efforts of the government and 
partners to tackle malnutrition in Sudan. 
A comprehensive multi-sectoral integrated approach could 
capitalize on the comparative advantages of different actors 
14Please refer to Results Framework and annual HRPs for target figures 
15Federal Ministry of Health Department of Nutrition, National Nutrition Strategic Plan 2014-2018, 2014 
© UN agencies 
The MULTI-YEAR HUMANITARIAN Strategy OUTCO MES: 

17 
to strengthen the resilience of the targeted people and 
address malnutrition in a comprehensive manner. This 
includes helping communities to better understand, analyse, 
and plan long-term solutions to tackle the root causes of 
vulnerability and malnutrition. This will include direct and 
lifesaving malnutrition support to affected populations as 
well as strategic interventions on behalf of other sectors, 
namely WASH, education and health to address underlying 
vulnerabilities. Under this strategy, partners will continue to 
support the government’s Scaling Up Nutrition (SUN) efforts 
to operationalize a multi-sectoral nutrition strategy. Long and 
short term causes of under-nutrition are addressed through 
evidence-based, cost-effective interventions (both curative 
and preventive aspects) implemented at key stages of the 
life-cycle of the targeted populations, from early nutrition to 
school children up to adults of productive age. Interventions 
will place particular emphasis on children, pregnant and 
lactating women, and older people. 
NORTHERN 
NILE 
RED SEA 
NORTH DARFUR 
NORTH KORDOFAN 
GEDAREF 
KASSALA 
SOUTH 
DARFUR 
SENNAR 
EAST 
DARFUR 
BLUE NILE 
WHITE 
NILE
AL GEZIRA 
CENTRAL 
DARFUR 
KHARTOUM 
WEST 
DARFUR 
Abyei 
area 
SOUTH 
KORDOFAN 
WEST 
KORDOFAN 
- + 
SEVERITY 
Kass 
Zamzam 
Gereida 
Mornei 
Otash 
Kalma 
Malnutrition severity ranking 2016 
Link to development programming: 
Succeeding in reducing malnutrition across Sudan will 
require a sustained investment from the Government of 
Sudan with support from development partners in the crucial 
areas of education about the causes of malnutrition, food 
insecurity, health, hygiene, safe water and sanitation. The 
National Nutrition Strategic Plan 2014–2018 will remain 
instrumental in guiding nutrition programming. Reducing 
food insecurity will entail significant investment in increasing 
livelihood opportunities as well as solid investment in natural 
resource management and employment opportunities 
(UNDAF Outcomes 1 and 2).16 Under UNDAF Outcome 3, 
the UN and partners will seek to improve equitable access to 
quality and comprehensive health, nutrition, water, sanitation 
and hygiene services, based on an equity-focused approach 
targeting the most vulnerable. 
© UN agencies 
16WFP/UNICEF Investment Case for Nutrition 
The MULTI-YEAR HUMANITARIAN Strategy OUTCO MES: 

18 coordination 
COO RDINATION OVERVIEW 
In line with UN GA Resolution 46/182, this Multi-Year 
Humanitarian Strategy will be implemented under the overall 
leadership of the Humanitarian Coordinator and in close 
consultation with the Government of Sudan, in line with 
national priorities. In collaboration with the HAC National 
Mechanism, coordination and monitoring of the 2017 HRP 
will be undertaken by the Inter-Sector Coordination Group 
(ISCG) and Area HCTs. The coordination of the refugee 
response under the Multi-Year Humanitarian Strategy will 
continue to be led by UNHCR17 and the Commission for 
Refugees (COR), through the Refugee Consultation Forum 
(RCF). The RCF will cover all interventions for refugees 
and asylum seekers delivered by humanitarian actors across 
Education, ES/NFI, FSL, Health, Nutrition, Protection and 
WASH Sectors. Building on progress made in 2016, the ISCG 
will expand multi-sectoral, integrated and, where feasible and 
appropriate, area-based approaches to deliver humanitarian 
assistance to people in need based on comparative advantage. 
The HCT and UN Country Team (UNCT), in parnership 
with the Government, will collaborate on analysis of needs 
and trends and capacities of Government, development and 
humanitarian partners programming to ensure layering 
and sequencing as appropriate, and commit to sharing data 
and information for the benefit of both development and 
humanitarian programming. Special attention will be paid 
to ensure adequate conflict-sensitive and risk-informed 
programming. The HCT, UNCT and Government will explore 
modalities of establishing joint mechanisms to monitor and 
evaluate the implementation of the strategy. 
The review of Sudan’s humanitarian coordination architecture 
in the second quarter of 2017 will be linked to this strategy 
and will recommend mechanisms to facilitate coordination 
and joint monitoring of the progress made against the outputs 
and outcomes of this strategy. The review will also explore 
how to strengthen Sudan’s humanitarian coordination 
architecture and how to further enhance coordination 
between humanitarian and development programming to 
ensure humanitarian and development partners targeting 
similar areas provide the required combination of short, 
medium and long-term activities. 
coordination 
17Joint note: Joint UNHCR-OCHA Note on Mixed Situations: Coordination in Practice (2014) 
184Ws: monitoring tool to track activities carried out (What, Where, by Whom, When) 
193Ws: Who does What, Where. 
© UN agencies

cross-cutti ng issues 19 
cross-cutti ng 
issues 
Centrality of Protection and 
accountability 
The overall aim of this strategy is to ensure that individuals 
and families are safe wherever they are, especially during 
displacement and upon return. In particular, humanitarian 
partners will take all necessary steps to avoid exposing people 
to further harm, and to reduce their exposure to risks to their 
safety and dignity. Participation of affected people in all stages 
of the Humanitarian Programme Cycle will be instrumental 
to ensure that their feedback is taken into account and that 
the response addresses their concerns in an appropriate and 
sustainable way. This will, for example, include feedback 
and complaints mechanisms, including related to sexual 
exploitation and abuse. Child protection responses must be 
established from the start of an emergency or children’s lives 
and well-being will be at risk. 
Humanitarian partners commit to ensure that services 
provided to beneficiaries are accessible without 
discrimination and based on needs. In addition, the 
humanitarian community is committed to providing relevant 
support to all actors and advocating for the upholding of 
their responsibilities and obligations under International 
Humanitarian Law, International Human Rights Law and 
International Refugee Law, recognizing that the Government 
holds the primary responsibility to protect civilians including 
refugees. 
Gender and age-sensitive programming 
The majority of people in need of humanitarian assistance 
in Sudan are women and children. Over 60 per cent of 
refugees and over 60 per cent of IDPs are children. Situations 
of displacement and emergency have devastating effects on 
children’s lives, and boys and girls are uniquely vulnerable 
due to their age and social status. Child protection responses 
must be established from the start of an emergency to prevent 
violence, abuse and exploitation. Female-headed households 
are commonplace due to multiple displacements and the 
separation of men and adolescent boys during conflictinduced 
displacement. In 2016 in North and South Darfur, 80 
per cent of single person-headed households were headed by 
women20 and nearly 88 per cent of South Sudanese refugees 
arriving in Sudan are women and children, with the majority 
of households headed by women.21 As a result, there has been 
a shift in traditional gender roles, exposing women and girls 
to increased levels of burden and risk, while still excluding 
women from decision-making mechanisms. Women and 
girls are also exposed to violence when on the move to collect 
water or firewood, work in fields or go to markets. 
Preventing and responding to gender-based violence (GBV) 
is therefore an important component of the Multi-Year 
Humanitarian Strategy. Given the multi-sectoral nature of 
the response required, humanitarian partners will seek to 
mainstream GBV prevention throughout the humanitarian 
response and in programming across all sectors, in 
collaboration with government partners. The focus also 
includes an emphasis on implementing assistance modalities 
that directly engage women and girls not just as direct 
beneficiaries, but as leaders in crises and recovery. In the 
context of the HCT Gender Strategy, the HCT has articulated 
minimum commitments for gender-sensitive programming 
throughout the Humanitarian Programme Cycle. The 
HCT-Gender Task Force (GIHA) is supporting the ISCG to 
develop context-specific gender guidance that can be applied 
throughout the humanitarian response. In monitoring the 
results of the strategy, interventions targeting women will be 
specifically measured. Also, humanitarian assistance will be 
designed with due attention given to the needs and capacity of 
youth, older people, and people with disabilities. 
Environment 
Climate change and related natural disasters have a strong 
bearing on the socio-economic situation of communities 
and households in Sudan. At the same time, environmental 
degradation, unsustainable use of natural resources and 
local level conflicts are both contributory factors and 
consequences of the humanitarian crisis in Sudan. While 
working towards sustainable natural resource management, 
improved governance of natural resources and climate 
change adaptation and mitigation on the development side, 
environmental partners in Sudan are already supporting 
humanitarian actors to ensure that humanitarian activities 
have a minimum impact or enhancing impact on the 
environment. In addition, both sides are working together 
to develop and replicate environmental best practice, such 
as integrated water resource management and sustainable 
forest management. This will result in more environmentally 
sustainable and accountable humanitarian actions, which 
contribute positively to building long-term resilience. This 
entails reviewing humanitarian projects submitted for the 
Sudan Humanitarian Fund, as well as intensive work with 
all IASC Sectors and RCF partners to build capacity and to 
mainstream good practices throughout the Humanitarian 
Programme Cycle. 
20According to IOM 
21According to UNHCR

20 monitoring & evaluation 
Vulnerability Analysis 
An increased emphasis on vulnerability analysis is central to 
the Humanitarian Response Strategy. Robust situation analysis 
and monitoring systems will inform operations and feed into 
the review and adaptation of the response, based on evidence, 
demonstrating evolving needs in the dynamic operating 
environment of Sudan. In addition, and in an effort to 
strengthen emergency preparedness and readiness, the HCT 
has committed to invest in the monitoring of risks. Other 
important initiatives will contribute to the need for evidence 
such as the 2017 locality-based multi-sector household survey 
(S3M), the vulnerability assessment within the UN-World 
Bank joint initiative, and continuous food security monitoring 
of displaced populations. Needs-based targeting of householdlevel 
assistance will continue to expand, building on lessons 
learned, including census-based and household-level food 
security profiling which at present is used to target the food 
assistance response among long-term IDPs. More broadly, 
the increased availability of sound evidence will enable better 
prioritization and targeting of the most deprived localities and 
communities needing humanitarian assistance. 
MONITORING 
In line with the HCT commitment to strengthen 
accountability to affected people and in line with the Agenda 
for Humanity’s core responsibility 4, Change people’s lives 
– from delivering aid to ending need, “success must now be 
measured by how people’s vulnerability and risk is reduced, 
not by how needs are met year after year.”22 During 2017, a 
results-based monitoring system will be developed that will 
integrate situation, response and results monitoring to show 
the impact of the activities carried out under this plan. Such a 
system will include: 
• The 2015 Emergency Response Framework (ERF) will 
continue to provide the reference to humanitarian 
partners in Sudan for more cohesive, principled and 
timely emergency implementation/response monitoring. 
Through the ISCG and the established 4W mechanism, 
OCHA, in close collaboration with HAC, will continue to 
monitor the response. 
• The ISCG and the HCT, in partnership with the 
Government, commit to measuring progress through 
results monitoring of the outcomes and outputs of the 
plan and regularly publish the results of these processes. 
EvALUA TION AND CON TINUOUS LEARNING 
• As part of mutual responsibility for aid efficiency, 
effectiveness and impact in humanitarian action, the 
humanitarian community and the Government will 
maximize the use of lessons learnt from independent 
evaluations of humanitarian response in order to 
capitalize on strengths and best practices generated 
within the long-term emergency response in Sudan . This 
will also help to continuously sharpen this Multi-Year 
Humanitarian Strategy for greater impact and sustainable 
results regarding the promotion of the humanitarian, 
development, and peace nexus. 
• Field testing, evaluation and replication of area-based, 
multi-sector, multi-year approaches will be used to build 
the evidence base for successful examples of the New 
Way of Working. While these approaches may only be 
appropriate in selected geographical areas, an area-based 
approach will allow capitalizing on successes, identifying 
preconditions of expansion of the approach, and 
advocating for replication. 
• RCF is working proactively in Sudan and in the region to 
plan, respond and monitor implementation. The Refugee 
Response Plan will continue to ensure coordinated 
planning in terms of the response to the South Sudan 
emergency. Monthly indicator reporting and the 4W 
mechanism will continue to be the tools utilized to 
monitor the response. Efforts to enhance information 
management within the RCF are ongoing to ensure 
timely information is available to inform the response. 
Regular field monitoring will continue and follow up with 
partners will enable the response to be adjusted as the 
situations evolves. 
22Agenda For Humanity, 2016: http://www.agendaforhumanity.org/agendaforhumanity 
monitoring 
& evaluation

monitoring & evaluation 21 
Outcome/Output Indicators Baseline Target 2017 Target 2018 Target 2019 
Outcome 1: Populations 
affected by natural or man-made 
disaster receive timely assistance 
during and in the aftermath of 
a shock 
• % of people affected by shocks who receive 
adequate minimum emergency assistance 
• % of newly arrived refugees who receive 
adequate minimum emergency assistance 
• % of people who report adequate access to 
and benefits from services received 
% of integrated emergency responses, 
including protection services, that follow 
evidence-based system and based on 
needs assessments 
• % of refugee multi-sectoral emergency 
responses that are based on coordinated 
needs assessments 
Output 1.1 Strengthened 
emergency response 
preparedness of humanitarian 
actors 
• # of national and inter-agency milestones 
on emergency preparedness reached, 
including the number of updated 
contingency plans 
• # of Preparedness Actions implemented 
as part of the Regional Refugee Response 
Plan and Country Contingency Plan 
• % of needs (identified in planning 
documents) met through prepositioning 
supplies 
Output 1.2 Affected people 
receive timely lifesaving 
humanitarian assistance and 
protection 
• % of new emergencies where adequate 
population data was available to inform 
the response in accordance with the 
Emergency Response Framework 
• % of new emergencies where needs 
assessments were conducted in accordance 
with the Emergency Response Framework 
• # of people in need assisted after the onset 
of an emergency in accordance with the 
Emergency Response Framework or other 
IASC frameworks 
• # of refugees assisted after the onset 
of influx in accordance with Refugee 
Response Plans 
• % of humanitarian assistance provided with 
community participation 
Output 1.3 Coping mechanisms 
are strengthened through 
integrated community-based 
early recovery programming 
• # of implemented projects strengthening 
coping mechanisms through integrated 
community-based approach 
• # of households provided with support to 
their own coping mechanisms 
• # projects providing support to refugees 
using a community-based integrated 
approach with the host community 
• 
DRAFT Results Framew ork

22 monitoring & evaluation 
Outcome/Output Indicators Baseline Target 2017 Target 2018 Target 2019 
Outcome 2: Displaced 
populations, refugees, returnees 
and host communities meet 
their basic needs and/or access 
essential basic services while 
increasing their self-reliance 
• % of people with long-term humanitarian 
needs accessing basic services and assistance 
• % of communities who are self-reliant and 
resilient to shocks and risks 
• % of refugees who have access to durable 
solutions and are self-reliant 
• % of people transferred out of humanitarian 
aid assistance and into national safety nets 
• % of people who report adequate access to 
and benefits from services received 
Output 2.1 People have equal, 
sustainable access to essential 
assistance based on vulnerability 
targeting 
• # of vulnerable people in need provided 
with assistance and protection services 
• # of refugees who can access basic services 
• # of institutions and facilities providing 
basic services 
Output 2.2 People in need have 
equal, sustainable access to 
quality basic services 
• # of people in need provided with 
sustainable basic services 
• # of institutions and facilities providing 
basic services 
Output 2.3 People in need 
have access to income and 
livelihood opportunities (target 
will decrease as development 
activities scale up) 
• # of households generating income based 
on livelihood support received 
• # of refugees who are provided with access 
to livelihoods and income opportunities 
• # of assets built, restored or maintained by 
targeted HH and communities, by unit and 
type 
Output 2.4 Refugees have 
access to protection services 
• # of refugees with access to referral mechanisms 
• # of refugees biometrically registered 
• # identified survivors/victims of SGBV and 
trafficking/kidnapping, UA Ms/separated 
children and individuals with undetermined 
status receiving assistance

monitoring & evaluation 23 
Outcome/Output Indicators Baseline Target 2017 Target 2018 Target 2019 
Outcome 3: Vulnerable 
residents in targeted areas have 
improved nutrition status and 
increased resilience 
• % of targeted local government institutions 
adopting nutrition-sensitive planning and 
budgeting systems 
• % of targeted localities with below emergency-
level GAM rates 
• % of mothers adopting optimal maternal 
and childcare practices 
• % of targeted communities where there is 
evidence of improved capacity to manage 
shocks and risks 
Output 3.1 Malnourished 
children, pregnant and 
lactating women (PLW) and 
other vulnerable groups have 
access to nutrition-sensitive and 
nutrition-specific services 
• # of boys and girls aged 6-59 months and 
PLW provided with acute malnutrition 
treatment services 
• # of nutritionally at-risk children under 
5 and PLW provided with food-based 
prevention services 
• # of children between 6-59 months and 
PLW who received micronutrient services 
• % of localities with multi-sectoral nutritionsensitive 
programme 
• # of localities with multi-sectoral nutritionsensitive 
programmes 
Output 3.2 Stakeholders and 
affected communities (national 
and state level)have improved 
capacity to prevent malnutrition 
in a multi-sectoral manner 
• # of trained community groups providing 
Social Behaviour Change Communication 
and other forms of nutrition education 
services 
• # of ministries and implementing partner 
programm managers trained on adopting 
nutrition-sensitive multi-sectoral approach 
• # states with a costed multi sectoral 
nutrition implementation plan available at 
state level 
• # of mothers and caregivers who 
participated in social and behaviour change 
activities promoting maternal and child 
care practices 
• # of institutions strengthened to plan and 
implement multi-sectoral program based 
on malnutrition risk analysis 
Output 3.3 The affected 
communities are empowered 
through community based 
livelihood interventions and 
other prevention and resilience 
measures 
• # of communities resilent to shocks and 
risks 
• # of individuals who have diversified their 
livelihood options 
• # of communities self-reliant through 
access to sustainable livelihoods 
• % of people transferred out of humanitarian 
aid and into national safety nets

24 monitoring & evaluation 
This document is produced on behalf of the Humanitarian Country Team and partners. 
The designation employed and the presentation of material on this report do not imply the expression of any opinion 
whatsoever on the part of the Humanitarian Country Team and partners concerning the legal status of any country, territory, 
city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. 
www.unocha.org/sudan 
www.humanitarianresponse.info/en/operations/sudan 
@UNOCHA_Sudan 
UNOCHA Sudan 
Humanitarian Kiosk

