HUMANITARIAN

2019

RESPONSE PLAN

JANUARY-DECEMBER 2019

NOV 2018


Photo: AU UN IST/Tobin Jones

 LIBYA



TOTAL POPULATION OF LIBYA


6.6M + 0.67M

 

PEOPLE IN NEED


823K

PEOPLE TARGETED


552K

FUNDING
REQUIREMENTS

$202M

APPEALING 
ORAGANIZATIONS

23

Migrants/Refugees

Libyans 

MediterraneanSea
ALGERIA 
(4%)
Migrants 
coming from 
Burkina Faso, 
Gambia, Mali, 
Morocco and 
SenegalTUNISIA (1%)
Migrants coming 
from MoroccoNIGER (52%)
Migrants coming 
from Burkina Faso, 
Cameroon, Ghana, 
Gambia, Mali, Nigeria, 
Senegal and BeninCHAD (10%)
Migrants coming 
from Chad, 
Cameroon, 
and SudanSUDAN (14.4%)
Migrants comingfrom Sudan, Egypt,
Ethiopia, Eritrea,
and SomaliaEGYPT (16.5%)
Migrants comingfrom Egypt, Sudan 
and SyriaMigrants 
refugees & Asylum seekersIDPs, Returnees &
Host/non-displaced
AlkufraMurzuqEjdabiaSirtAljufrahNalutGhatWadi AshshatiTobrukMisrataDernaSebhaUbariBenghaziAlmarjAlmargebAl JabalAl AkhdarZwaraAljfaraTripoliAl JabalAl GharbiAzzawyaGREECEITALYCYPRUSNUMBER OF TARGETED 
POPULATIONData source: DTM Libya round 21, August 2018, sectors3,00050,000150,000

TABLE OF CONTENT

PART I: COUNTRY STRATEGY

Foreword by the Humanitarian CoordinatorThe humanitarian response plan at a glanceOverview of the crisisStrategic objectivesResponse strategyOperational capacityHumanitarian accessResponse monitoringSummary of needs, targets & requirements 
PART II: OPERATIONAL RESPONSE PLANSProtectionHealthFood security 
Water, Sanitation & Hygiene (WASH)
Shelter and Non-Food Items (NFIs)
EducationMulti-Purpose Cash AssistanceCommon Services (Logistic, Emergency Telecommunication, 
Coordination)
PART III: ANNEXESObjectives, indicators & targetsParticipating organizations & funding requirementsPlanning figures: people in need and targetedWhat if? ... we fail to respond

FOREWORD BY

THE HUMANITARIAN 
COORDINATOR

Seven years of instability and insecurity have taken their toll 
on the wellbeing of many children, women and men in Libya. 
Each passing year people struggle to withstand the impacts of 
the crisis that has destabilized the country, put them in harm’s 
way, driven up food prices, and ravaged the economy. 

Libya is now producing well over one million barrels of oil a 
day. However, this has not yet translated into tangible benefits 
for people. Many Libyans get poorer every year. Basic health 
and education services decay, and frustrated citizens cannot 
understand why oil production and increased government 
revenue does not lead to improved living standards, security 
and well-being for all in Libya. 

Vulnerable people and families are unable to afford food, 
water, and basic household items and are forced to resort to 
taking desperate measures and adopting degrading coping 
mechanisms just to get through these difficult times. 

Refugees and migrants face grave human rights violations 
and abuses in the absence of rule of law, many of them young 
people from sub-Saharan Africa looking for opportunities 
to work and for a better life. They face high risks of arbitrary 
detention and exploitation, often simply because of the colour 
of their skin. 

As Humanitarian Coordinator for Libya this is the second 
Humanitarian Response Plan I have launched. During 
that time partners have kept making important progress 
increasing humanitarian access, building strong relations 
and partnerships with national and local organisations, and 
opening up to civil society. 

Moving forward into 2019 we have a better understanding of 
the humanitarian situation in Libya than ever before, which 
has enabled us to build a response plan based on strong 
evidence. We intend to support the most severely affected 
and vulnerable people, many of whom are in the South. We 
will continue to support Libyans struggling to access essential 
services and basic household items, we will work closely with 
development partners and together help displaced people 
get back to their homes and support them in rebuilding their 
lives, and we will continue to address the plight of refugees 
and migrants who need our protection and assistance. 

Ultimately, the future of Libya is very much in the hands of 
the Libyans. Progress on the political, security and economic 
reform are essential in ensuring sustainable pathways to 
stability and peace, and many efforts are ongoing in this 
regard. But right now, while people are suffering, it is 
absolutely critical that the international community work 
together with national partners to make sure vulnerable 
people are supported and protected.

Maria do Valle Ribeiro
Humanitarian Coordinator for Libya



THE HUMANITARIAN RESPONSE PLAN

AT A GLANCE

PEOPLE IN NEED

823K

PEOPLE TARGETED

552K

REQUIREMENTS (US$)

$202M

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 1

Provide and improve 
safe and dignified access 
to essential goods and 
critical public services in 
synergy with sustainable 
development assistance. 

POPULATION IN NEED AND TARGETED BY POPULATION GROUP

REFUGEESMIGRANTSPOPULATION GROUPPEOPLE TARGETEDPEOPLE IN NEED179K56K288K125KIDPS73K97KRETURNEES116K165KHOST & 
NON-DISPLACED130K148K
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 2

Enhance protection and 
promote adherence to 
International Humanitarian 
Law, International 
Human Rights Law, and 
International Refugee Law.

POPULATION IN NEED AND TARGETED BY SECTOR

POPULATION TARGETED BY LIBYAN AND NON-LIBYAN

SECTORPEOPLE TARGETEDPEOPLE IN NEEDPROTECTION234K490KEDUCATION71K93KFOOD SECURITY197K298KHEALTH388K554KSHELTER & NFI195K292KWASH150K267KMULTI 
PURPOSE CASH74K
Migrants 
refugees & Asylum seekersIDPs, Returnees& Host/non-displaced
AlkufraMurzuqEjdabiaSirtAljufrahNalutGhatWadi AshshatiTobrukMisrataDernaSebhaUbariBenghaziAlmarjAlmargebAl JabalAl AkhdarZwaraAljfaraTripoliAl JabalAl GharbiAzzawyaNUMBER OF TARGETED POPULATIONData source: 
DTM Libya round 21, 
August 2018, sectors3,00050,000150,000
FUNDING REQUIREMENT BY SECTOR

POPULATION TARGETED BY 
LIBYAN AND NON-LIBYAN

FUNDING REQUIREMENT BY 
LIBYAN AND NON-LIBYAN

COMMONSERVICESMULTI 
PURPOSE CASHEDUCATIONWASHFOOD 
SECURITYSHELTER & NFIPROTECTIONHEALTH$43.5M$53.9M$18.3M$24.4M$9.5M$12.2MNON-
LIBYANLIBYAN$16.5M$23.2M
319K51K182K156K233KMIGRANTS 
REFUGEES & 
ASYLUM SEEKERSIDPS, RETURNEES 
& HOST/NON-
DISPLACEDFEMALEMALETOTAL163K
$126M$76MMIGRANTS 
REFUGEES & 
ASYLUM SEEKERSIDPS, 
RETURNEES & 
HOST/NON- 
DISPLACED62%38%

OVERVIEW OF

THE CRISIS

An estimated 823,000 people, including around 248,000 children, are in-need 
of humanitarian assistance in Libya as a result of persisting political instability, 
conflict and insecurity, the breakdown of the rule of law, a deteriorating public 
sector and a dysfunctional economy. People in-need of assistance include 
internally displaced persons, returnees, non-displaced conflict affected people 
and host communities, and refugees1
1 For the purpose of this document, the term “refugee” shall be used to 
include refugees as well as asylum-seekers.

 and migrants. 

As highlighted in the Humnaitarian Needs Overview (HNO) 
for 2019, key humanitarian needs in Libya are linked to i) 
protection, ii) access to critical services such as healthcare and 
education, and safe drinking water and sanitation, and iii) 
access to basic household goods and commodities including 
food and essential non-food items. These humanitarian 
needs reflect life-threatening risks from exposure to violence, 
vulnerability, and the inability to cope with human rights 
violations and abuses, and the deprivation of essential services 
and commodities. 

The protracted crisis in Libya continues to be of grave concern 
with both Libyans and non-Libyans paying a high price for 
seven years of instability and insecurity. Approximately half 
of the people in need of humanitarian assistance are Libyans. 
Refugees and migrants in or transiting through Libya make 
up the other half. The majority of people in need are found in 
urban areas in the western and eastern regions of the country. 
However, many of the most severe needs are in the southern 
mantikas2
2 The term ‘mantika’ describes a major administrative and geographic area of Libya. There are twenty-two mantikas in Libya.

 of Murzuq, Sebha and Al Kufra, although severe 
needs are also found in Sirt, on the north-coast. 

While the impacts of the crisis on people in all affected groups 

PEOPLE IN NEED BY MANTIKA *
6,00070,000190,000
MIGRANTS 
REFUGEES & ASYLUM 
SEEKERSIDPS, RETURNEES &
HOST +NON-DISPLACEDWESTSOUTHEASTAlkufraMurzuqEjdabiaSirtAljufraNalutGhatWadi AshshatiTobrukAl JabalAl GharbiMisrataDernaSebhaUbariBenghaziAlmarjAlmargebAl JabalAl AkhdarZwaraAljfaraAzzawyaTripoliGREECEITALYCYPRUS
SEVERITY AND SCALE OF NEEDS

Jul 2012Election and transfer 
of power from NTC 
to General National 
Congress (GNC)
Jun 2014Second parliamentary 
elections held to elect the 
House of RepresentativesJul 2014HOR leaves Tripoli and re-establishes itself 
in Tobruk; GNC re-establishes itself in 
Tripoli; UN pulls out; Operation Dawn 
launched ousting Zintan forces from the cityDec 2015 
UN facilitates the 
signing of the Libyan 
Political Agreement in 
Skhirat, Morocco 
2011Between 100,000 and 150,000 
people are internally displaced by 
clashes. The National Transitional 
Council (NTC) declares the 
liberation of LibyaJul 
have been severe, needs vary according to the characteristics 
and contextual situation of different populations. Of note, 
refugees and migrants often face specific protection issues 
including grave human rights violations and abuses by state and 
non-state actors given their irregular status, lack of domestic 
support networks, impunity for crimes committed against 
foreign nationals, racism and xenophobia, and policies linked 
to the control of mixed migrations flows to Europe. 

People identified as vulnerable are individuals or families who 
have specific circumstances that undermine or limit their 
resilience to withstand the impacts of the crisis. Vulnerabilities 
are mainly related to gender, age, disabilities, ill-health, 
nationality, and legal status. People who have been forced to 
adopt emergency level negative coping mechanisms due to 
socio-economic challenges are also considered vulnerable. 

The most vulnerable groups suffering as a result of the situation 
in Libya are those who are exposed to insecurity and conflict, 
people who are socio-economically disadvantaged, and/
or foreign nationals who face discrimination and prejudice. 
Amongst these groups, women, children, youth, people with 
disabilities, and older persons have been severely impacted 
by the crisis, in particular female-headed households, women 
and girls victims of Gender-Based Violence (GBV), children 
survivors of violence, migrant and refugee women living in 
detention centres, unaccompanied children, and children 
out of school. Other specific groups also include people with 
disabilities and elderly persons without support networks and 
with no access to healthcare assistance, unemployed young 
men at risk of being recruited into armed groups, and young 
refugees and migrants from sub-Saharan African countries. 
Also identified as particularly vulnerable are Tawergha 
communities, refugees and migrants transiting through Libya, 
refugees and migrants in detention centres, and displaced 
people living in informal settlements and/or being prevented 
to return home due to security threats and risks. Persons of 
undetermined legal status (PULS) who consider themselves 
Libyan but are not officially recognized as citizens and cannot 
access documentation are also considered vulnerable, as a 
marginalized group without access to the rights and benefits 
that come with citizenship.

VULNERABLE GROUPS

Severely affected women with 
gender specific vulnerabilitiesChildren at risk and exposed to 
hardship, violence and abuseIDPs living in informal 
settlements and IDPs unable 
to return to their homes 
Severely affected elderly 
persons including those with 
specific healthcare needsOut-of-school or unemployed 
youth, and young migrants 
and refugeesCrisis affected persons 
with disabilitiesTawergha 
communityVulnerable refugees and 
migrants in or transiting 
through LibyaVulnerable refugees and 
migrants from East- and 
sub-Saharan African countriesRefugees and Migrants in 
Detention Centres

STRATEGIC

OBJECTIVES

1 Provide and improve safe and dignified 
access to essential goods and critical public 
services in synergy with sustainable development 
assistance.

Seven years into the crisis, people across Libya have 
been increasingly impacted by the deterioration of public 
services. The dysfunctional public health system, challenges in 
the education sector, and non-functional water and sanitation 
services have resulted in a lack of access to primary and 
secondary healthcare, children struggling to access quality 
education, and limited access to water supply and poor waste 
management. Moreover, people most in need have not been 
able to afford basic food items, such as bread, due to low 
incomes, inflated prices, limited or exhausted savings, and 
challenges to access cash as a result of the liquidity crisis. 
Refugees and migrants are amongst the poorest and most 
discriminated against people in Libya. They are often denied 
access to essential services and face difficulties in buying basic 
household items. 

The humanitarian community will assist the most severely 
affected people in need through the provision of food, water, 
sanitation, hygiene materials, non-food items and cash, and 
support both the delivery of and access to safe primary and 
secondary healthcare and education. Humanitarian aid will 
complement development and stabilization assistance that is 
rehabilitating basic services facilities, such as medical centres, 
schools, and water and sewerage systems, undertaken as part 
of the UN Strategic Framework. These interventions aim to 
address many of the underlying causes of humanitarian needs.

2 Enance protection and promote adherence 
to International Humanitarian Law, International 
Human Rights Law, and International 
Refugee Law.

Protection needs are amongst the most commonly 
reported needs in Libya for all people affected by the crisis, 
whether Libyan or foreign nationals. Protection needs are 
primarily driven by exposure to conflict and violence, human 
rights violations and abuses, contamination from explosive 
hazards in urban centres, breakdown of the rule of law, and 
major challenges related to impediments to access critical 
services and essential goods and commodities. Refugees 
and migrants face similar protection challenges as Libyans, 
being directly exposed to conflict and increased criminality 
throughout the country. However, they also face additional 
protection issues as a result of racism, discrimination, lack of 
tribal and family support networks, impunity for perpetrators 
of criminal acts that target them, taking advantage of their 
vulnerabilities including their irregular status and poor socio-
economic standing in Libya. 

Humanitarian partners aim to prevent and mitigate 
protection risks and respond to protection needs, by working 
with communities and local authorities to create a protective 
environment in which International Humanitarian Law, 
International Human Rights Law, and International Refugee 
Law is promoted and adhered to, and critical protection 
assistance is made available to the most severely in-need and 
vulnerable people in Libya.

Humanitarian assistance will be delivered in a principled, 
inclusive, accountable, dignified and timely manner, and guided 
by solid evidence, based on a robust analysis of humanitarian 
needs and a human rights based approach. The humanitarian 
community is committed to continuing its efforts to ensure 
a strong presence in Libya and deliver assistance working 
with local partners, building their capacity and together 
overcoming operational and access challenges. Achieving the 
above objectives is contingent upon the availability of sufficient 
resources and humanitarian access. 



Planning scenario

The Humanitarian Response Plan (HRP) is based on a series 
of planning assumptions which the HCT believes reflect the 
most likely situation in Libya in 2019. As the HRP is a flexible 
framework that should support a relevant, adaptive and agile 
response, it will be revised should the situation differ from the 
planning assumptions in the coming 12 months.

A protracted crisis resulting in a worsening humanitarian 
situation

The HRP is based on the assumption that political instability, 
security and economic challenges will continue, leading to a 
worsening of the humanitarian situation, and an increasing 
scale and severity of humanitarian needs as more families 
and individuals become more vulnerable, less resilient to the 
impacts of the crisis, and no longer able to ensure their basic 
safety, security and welfare. Outbreaks and/or the spread of 
infectious diseases will continue to remain major public health 
threats. Outbreak of acute watery diarrhea and the spread 
of Tuberculosis along with other respiratory infections are 
considered highly likely, particularly in overcrowded living 
conditions areas such as detention centres. .

Conflict-driven displacement

Continued localized conflicts and insecurity, including fighting 
among armed groups and militias competing for power, 
territory and natural resources are expected to remain the main 
drivers behind population movements in Libya. While returns 
to areas where armed conflicts have subsided have increased 
over the past year, insecurity and protection issues including 
threats of violence and fear of reprisals is likely to continue to 
prevent many returns. Libyans who plan to move back to their 
homes will require humanitarian assistance in line with the 
principles of safe, dignified and voluntary return. 

Political fragmentation and economic decline

Fragmentation of the country related to political and 
economic interests, political instability, and the fragility 
and dysfunctionality of state institutions and public-service 
providers is expected to continue. The fragmentation of the 
health system will continue to hamper the roll-out of an 
Essential Health Service Package model in Libya. Challenges 
to access cash due to the liquidity crisis and the overall 
inflation of prices is also likely to continue in 2019, having a 
negative impact on people’s ability to access essential goods 
and services. Further erosion of the public sector will lead to 
continued challenges in terms of healthcare and education 
service provision, mains electicity, water supply, and 
sanitation management.

Protection crisis

People’s need for protection, mental health and psychosocial 
support assistance will remain high and should be a priority 
for the international community. Protection needs will 
continue as a result of people’s exposure, vulnerability, 
and inability to cope with conflict and violence, human 
rights violations and abuses, contamination from explosive 
hazards in urban areas, breakdown of rule of law, and major 
challenges related to impediments to access critical services 
and essential goods and commodities.

Migration flows

Even though irregular migration flows by sea to Europe from 
Libya have significantly decreased in 2018, Libya is expected 
to remain a transit and destination country for migrants and 
refugees in 2019. Both refugees and migrants will continue 
to face dire living conditions and be vulnerable to physical 
and mental abuse, discrimination, exploitation, gender-based 
violence, arbitrary arrest and detention. 

RESPONSE

STRATEGY

The response strategy in 2019 is focused on people with the most severe 
humanitarian needs across Libya, aiming to protect the vulnerable and help 
those struggling to meet their basic needs by enabling access to essential 
services, and household goods and commodities. Working to overcome 
challenges in a complex operating environment with humanitarian access 
constraints, humanitarian partners will support Libyans, refugees, and migrants 
through principled humanitarian assistance based on both the needs and rights 
of affected people.



Attacks on Healthcare

In 2018, multiple attacks and threats towards healthcare 
facilities and workers were recorded across Libya, including 
violence, kidnapping, and assassinations of health service 
providers. These attacks and threats are expected to continue 
with high frequency, endangering healthcare providers and 
ultimately depriving people of urgently needed assistance. 
The full extent of these attacks is expected to be significant, 
negatively affecting both access to short-term healthcare 
services and the longer-term health and well-being of affected 
populations. 

Access challenges

Overall, both international and national humanitarian 
response capacities will continue to face challenges primarily 
as a result of security-driven access limitations, administrative 
constraints, rapidly changing situations and shifts in areas 
of control, and operational bottlenecks along major supply 
routes often in the hard-to-reach locations, impacting the 
capacity of humanitarian actors to meet the increasing needs 
of the most vulnerable people. 

Following the decision of lifting the evacuation status in 
February 2018, humanitarian actors have started relocating 
international staff in Libya, and will continue to make efforts 
to progressively scale up their operational capacity and 
presence on the ground, security situation permitting.

Scope of the response

The overarching scope of the response was determined based 
on an analysis of HNO findings, humanitarian access analysis, 
a review of development and stabilization assistance in Libya, 
humanitarian aid being provided by partners outside the 
HRP, the planning scenario for the coming year, and analyses 
by sectors/partners in terms of projected response capacity in 
2019. 

Programmatic scope

Humanitarian action in 2019 will aim to prevent loss of life 
and reduce suffering. This represents a significant focus of the 
programmatic scope of the response compared to 2018, which 
included some restoration of basic physical infrastructure, 
re-establishment of public services and livelihoods recovery. 
Humanitarian organisations will continue supporting durable 
solutions for refugees and migrants such as voluntary home 
return, resettlement, and family reunification outside the 
scope the 2019 HRP.

Humanitarian actions identified in the HRP are based on 
the evidence provided by the HNO, on key humanitarian 
needs and the scope and severity of needs across the country. 
While needs severity, both inter-sectoral and sectoral, has 
informed prioritization response approaches, the response 
covers the entire country and does not limit its geographical 
scope exclusively to the mantikas with the highest needs 
severity. Similarly, vulnerabilities have informed inter-sectoral 
and sectoral targeting and the definition of priority response 
interventions, but have not been used to define the scope of 
the plan.

The parameters of the response were determined through 
consultations with Libyan national and local authorities, 
donors, UN agencies and other humanitarian partners, 
including national and international NGOs, under the 
direction and guidance of the Humanitarian Country Team 
(HCT), supported by the Inter-Sector Coordination Group 
(ISCG). 

Demographic scope

The response scope includes severely affected people in 
need of humanitarian assistance as a result of the crisis in 
Libya. Included are Libyans, and refugees and migrants, the 
majority of whom are from sub-Saharan African countries. 
The response covers populations in-need in all mantikas of 
Libya, including critical interventions targeting the most 
severely affected people in the South, though the majority of 
operations will be delivered in the highly populated urban 
areas along the north coast.

CriticalSevereMajorMediumLowPEOPLE TARGETED BY MANTIKA *
MIGRANTS 
REFUGEES & ASYLUM SEEKERSIDPS, RETURNEES &
HOST/NON-DISPLACED319K233KWESTSOUTHEASTAlkufraMurzuqEjdabiaSirtAljufraNalutGhatWadi AshshatiTobrukAl JabalAl GharbiMisrataDernaSebhaUbariBenghaziAlmarjAlmargebAl JabalAl AkhdarZwaraAljfaraAzzawyaTripoli3,00050,000150,000


Key principles of the collective response: centrality 
of protection, engagement with communities and 
Accountability to Affected Populations (AAP), gender, 
age and diversity.

Centrality of protection 

The crisis in Libya is characterized by major protection 
issues, including widespread human rights violations and 
abuses, violence against women and children, and arbitrary 
and unlawful detention of refugees and migrants, who are 
subjected to live in inhumane conditions, and suffer torture 
and the denial of basic services such as medical care.

SEVERITY OF NEEDS AND TARGETS BY MANTIKA 



Protection is at the centre of the humanitarian response in 
2019, with all humanitarian activities aiming to support 
people in need with full respect for the rights of the 
individual. All interventions will aim to promote and ensure 
the safety, dignity and rights of affected people, and reduce 
or mitigate exposure to additional risks, applying the do-no-
harm principle and through conflict sensitive approaches. 

The centrality of protection is an integral part of each sector 
strategy and the broader HRP strategy for Libya. To this end, 
the HCT has taken concrete steps to ensure each project in 
the 2019 HRP integrates protection-related components, such 
as a protection risks analysis of the specific needs of different 
population groups, barriers to people’s access to humanitarian 
assistance, the need to address inequalities or protection 
threats (i.e. violence, coercion, exploitation, deprivation, or 
neglect), safety and dignity of affected people. 

While responding to humanitarian needs, the HCT will 
continue to advocate for people’s protection and access to 
humanitarian assistance, empowering crisis-affected people, 
ensuring peoples voices are heard, and promoting respect 
for international humanitarian law and the principles of 
humanity, neutrality, independence and impartiality. As part 
of its commitment to enabling a protective environment for 
vulnerable communities, the HCT will develop a protection 
strategy that raises awareness on humanitarian issues, 
monitors and mitigates/addresses protection risks, and 
undertakes access analysis and security risk management. 
The strategy will also aim to empower communities, families 
and individuals on how to address protection concerns, build 
partnerships with all key actors, and strengthen operational 
capacity to respond, particularly the capacity of national and 
local partners. 

PERCENTAGE OF PROJECTS INCLUDING CENTRALITY OF 
PROTECTION

9191858276%
% of projects including community engagement in its monitoringand evaluation?
% of projects having a built-in feedback and/or complaintmechanisms% of projects designed and informed based on consultationswith affected people,
% of projects providing beneficiaries with information about theassistance to be provided% of projects based on a protection risk analysis considering thespecific needs of different population groupsPercentage of projects integrating AAP measures749682767674%
% of projects identifying and addressing barriers to access thatdifferent population groups could face in relation to the project% of projects taking into consideration protection from sexualexploitation and abuse issues% of projects seeking to address inequalities or protectionthreats, i.e. violence, coercion, exploitation, deprivation, or…
% of projects measuring access of beneficiaries?
% of projects measuring safety of beneficiaries?
% of projects measuring dignity of beneficiaries?
Percentage of projects including Centrality of Protection 
5668.60.114727.80.99CriticalHighMed/requirementby project priority and Libyans and non-
LibyansLibyansNon-
LibyansFunding29%
UN Strategic Framework (UNSF) requirementsTotalrequirements$

Gender, Age and Diversity: link to vulnerability 
analysis in the HNO, responses tailored to the specific 
needs of vulnerable groups

Women, Children and Youth

Women, children and yough represent around 50 per cent of 
the people in need of humanitarian assistance and are among 
the most vulnerable groups in Libya. 

Based on the inter-sector needs analysis, an estimated 278,000 
women are identified as in need of humanitarian assistance 
including 150,000 women facing protection issues including 
GBV, an estimated 170,000 women facing challenges to access 
to relevant and sufficient healthcare services. An estimated 
36,000 girls need support to access quality education. An 
estimated 134,000 children (54,000 girls and 80,000 boys) are 
in need of child protection services. 

As highlighted by the HNO, severely affected women are 
considered particularly vulnerable to risks and exposed 
to threats as a result of the crisis in Libya. Many refugee 
and migrant women and girls have specific vulnerabilities, 
primarily based on a combination of risks linked to their 
irregular status and social issues related to sexism, racism and 
violence in Libya and in neighbouring transit countries. 

The crisis is also taking a heavy toll on lives of children 
and youth in Libya. Children and young people suffer 
from the direct consequences of war and armed violence, 
being exposed to risks of physical injuries, loss of life, 
trauma, displacement, and recruitment by armed groups. 
Unaccompanied children, children at risk of being perceived 
as affiliated with armed groups, child survivors of physical 
and sexual violence, children with disabilities, out-of-school 
children, and children who are arbitrarily detained and at risk 
of being trafficked are among the most vulnerable in Libya. 
Refugee and migrant children are particularly exposed to 
risks and face grave human rights abuses across Libya and in 
detention centres, including sexual exploitation and abuse, 
beatings and other forms of violence.

In 2019, humanitarian actors plan to assist the most 
vulnerable children, including children with disabilities 
and child survivors of violence including GBV, through 
integrated case management and individual follow up and 
response/referral to services to restore dignity and prevent 
further distress. The Continuum of Care for Reproductive, 
Maternal, Newborn and Child Health will be a major priority 
of the health sector partners in order to improve access of 
mothers and children to integrated package of health services 
at primary and secondary levels. Such specialized services 
will include best interest assessments and determination 
for refugee and migrant children, structured and sustained 
psychosocial support and rehabilitation and reintegration 
services for children affected by armed conflict. Case 
management, including referrals, will be a priority for 
the international response. In addition, the humanitarian 
community aims to increase children’s access to quality 
emergency education, through provision of non-formal and 



formal education opportunities, life skills and vocational 
training. The response will enhance the learning environment 
in conflict-affected schools, through provision of temporary 
learning centres and classroom equipment, and provide 
psychosocial support to conflict affected students, while 
addressing violence in schools in collaboration with Child 
Protection actors. 

Persons with Disabilities 

Humanitarian actors aim to address the needs of persons with 
disabilities, particularly those who have been heavily impacted 
by direct exposure to conflict and violence. Within crisis-
affected communities, children and adults with disabilities 
are usually among the most marginalized, yet they often are 
not included and fail to benefit from humanitarian assistance, 
and face challenges in accessing appropriate basic services. 
They also have specific needs related to their vulnerabilities 
such as requiring rehabilitation support, and assistive devices. 
Information on persons with disabilities in Libya is limited, 
however, humanitarian partners are committed to increased 
efforts to improve the availability and quality of data regarding 
people with disabilities. 

Elderly People

As highlighted by the HNO, the elderly population (over 64 
years old) represents 5.1 per cent of the overall population in 
Libya. Elderly persons are considered vulnerable in Libya due 
to having less resilience against the impacts of the crisis due 
to challenges related to physical frailty and limited availability 
of public services that are sufficient to meet their needs. 
Around 59 per cent of the elderly population in Libya suffer 
from chronic diseases, of which 76 per cent face challenges 
due to a lack of access to medicines. In 2019, humanitarian 
actors are committed to enhance collective efforts to deepen 
their understanding of age-related vulnerabilities through 
monitoring and assessments. They will also enhance efforts 
to ensure response interventions are tailored to the distinct 
and specific needs of all population groups, including elderly 
people. 

Improving Vulnerability Analysis

In 2019, the humanitarian community is committed to 
continuing to enhance and deepen its understanding of 
vulnerabilities through sectoral and inter-sectoral monitoring 
and assessments, including gender-based vulnerabilities, and 
to ensure a more gender and age sensitive determination of 
humanitarian needs. Partners will also further strengthen 
their efforts to improve quality of sex and age-disaggregated 
data, and to systematically collect information on the impact 
of age and gender-based vulnerability using participatory 
and inclusive needs assessment tools, including multi-
sectoral needs assessments and monitoring mechanisms. 
Humanitarian partners will also strengthen the provision of 
specialized GBV services to survivors by scaling them up to 
areas previously hard-to-reach, such as Sebha and Sirt and to 
new locations, such as Alkufra and Murzuq. Strengthening 
local capacity to respond to and prevent GBV cases, and 
provide a full package of mental health and psychosocial 
support will also be a key priority for the response. 

Accountability to Affected Population and 
Communication with Communities 

Putting people at the centre of humanitarian action and 
strengthening accountability to affected people in need are 
priorities for the response in 2019. 

Since the beginning of the crisis in 2014, remote and semi-
remote management of humanitarian operations has been 
applied to overcome significant challenges to regular and 
effective engagement with communities. Reliance on a limited 
number of implementing local partners able to reach people 
in need and use of third-party monitoring mechanisms 
have been some of the most common modalities adopted 
by humanitarian partners to reach and communicate with 
communities and obtain their feedback on their needs and 
assistance provided. 

Assessments and studies including the MSNA, and an 
Internews, UNHCR and Mercy Corps study, have driven the 
humanitarian response forward in improved communication 
with communities, highlighting key priority issues such as 
the main information needs of affected people being related 
to health and medical issues, access to assistance, information 
on education and safe places to live, and security, political 
and economic developments. The humanitarian community 
now also better understands that the most trusted sources of 
information for affected people are family, friends, neighbours 
and religious and tribal leaders, and that the main tools for 
accessing information are mobile phone applications, the 
internet, and events including social gatherings, noting that in 
certain communities, where conservatism is growing, face to 
face communication is a key information source for women.

Improved communication with communities has also meant 
communities being much more engaged in response planning, 
particularly at partner project development stages. 

PERCENTAGE OF PROJECTS INTEGRATING AAP MEASURES

9191858276%
% of projects including community engagement in its monitoringand evaluation?
% of projects having a built-in feedback and/or complaintmechanisms% of projects designed and informed based on consultationswith affected people,
% of projects providing beneficiaries with information about theassistance to be provided% of projects based on a protection risk analysis considering thespecific needs of different population groupsPercentage of projects integrating AAP measures749682767674%
% of projects identifying and addressing barriers to access thatdifferent population groups could face in relation to the project% of projects seeking to address inequalities or protectionthreats, % of projects measuring access of beneficiaries?
% of projects measuring safety of beneficiaries?
% of projects measuring dignity of beneficiaries?
Percentage of projects including Centrality of Protection 


Having identified that efforts to ensure AAP are currently 
limited to measures by individual organizations gathering 
feedback on the delivery and impacts of projects, the HCT 
is moving forward with a system-wide approach on AAP 
through an inter-agency feedback mechanism in order to 
hold the humanitarian community accountable to the people 
it aims to serve. Such a mechanism would aim to collect 
feedback directly from communities on their needs, priorities 
and expectations, ensure assistance responds to the specific 



needs of different population groups and reaches the most 
vulnerable people. It would be supported by the ET sector, and 
developed in close collaboration with all sectors. 

Protection from Sexual Exploitation and Abuse (PSEA)

The humanitarian community is committed to ensuring 
Protection from Sexual Exploitation and Abuse (PSEA) 
is a central principle of the humanitarian response in 
Libya. Under the leadership of the HCT, the humanitarian 
community will work together to establish a collective 
system on PSEA, to raise awareness on the issue, ensure that 
robust measures to prevent sexual exploitation and abuse by 
humanitarian workers are in place, and to ensure appropriate 
complaints mechanisms are established, and procedures are in 
place to address PSEA issues. To this end, with the support of 
UNFPA and UNICEF, the roll out of the interagency PSEA has 
been initiated in Libya. The key priorities for 2019 incudes the 
establishment of a community-based complaints mechanism 
to share information on the PSEA policy and channels to 
report incidents and the establishment of an in-country 
network that will foresee the development of SEA prevention 
and response strategy for Libya. 

Inter-sectoral Priorities and Integrated Response 

Intersectoral prioritization 

Response priorities are focused on providing the most 
critically needed support to the most severely affected and 
most vulnerable people in Libya. While overarchingly the 
response aims to prevent loss of life and reduce suffering, 
the humanitarian community has prioritized response 
interventions based on six inter-agency agreed criteria. These 
include: 

1. Inter-sectoral severity: humanitarian partners have 
prioritized the response to target mantikas with critical 
and high needs severity, these include Alkufra, Murzuq, 
Sebha and Sirt. 
2. Vulnerabilities: response interventions targeting more 
than one vulnerable group have been prioritized. The 
HNO identified ten vulnerable groups including women 
(e.g. women-headed households, women victims of GBV, 
migrant and refugee women living in detention centres, 
etc.), children (e.g. unaccompanied children, children 
out of school and at risk of drop-out), youth (particularly 
unemployed young men at risk of being recruited 
into armed groups, and young men from sub-Saharan 
Africa), elderly persons, persons with disabilities, and the 
Tawergha community. The HNO also included refugees 
and migrants in or transiting through Libya, sub-
Saharan migrants and refugees, refugees and migrants 
in Detention Centres and IDPs living in informal 
settlements, abandoned and/or public buildings as being 
vulnerable. 
3. Scale of needs: though the scope of the response is 
countrywide, interventions targeting mantikas with the 
highest number of people in need have been prioritized 
as part of the collective response. The highest numbers of 
people in need by mantika are found in Tripoli, Benghazi, 
Sirt and Misrata. 
4. Urgency and importance: life-saving, time critical and 
critically enabling actions are prioritized. Life-saving and 
time critical assistance can include interventions such 
as ensuring access to critically needed medicines and 
medical services, ensuring access to safe drinking water, 
mine clearance support, mine risk education, protection 
referral mechanisms, access to food, nutritional 
screening. Critically enabling assistance can include 
logistics, coordination, and/or advocacy support that 
opens essential humanitarian access. 
5. Integrated programming: projects that have inter-sectoral 
complementarity with other projects, joint programmes, 
and multi-sectoral projects have been prioritized, as they 
are expected to be highly efficient and effective. 


These criteria were applied to the projects included in the 
HRP. HRP projects meeting five out of six prioritization 
criteria were labelled as “critical priority”, projects meeting 
three to four criteria were scored as “high priority”, and 
projects meeting less than three criteria were assessed as 
“medium/low priority”. 

FUNDING REQUIREMENT BY PROJECT PRIORITY AND 
LIBYANS AND NON-LIBYANS

9191858276%
% of projects including community engagement in its monitoringand evaluation?
% of projects having a built-in feedback and/or complaintmechanisms% of projects designed and informed based on consultationswith affected people,
% of projects identifying and addressing barriers to access thatdifferent population groups could face in relation to the project% of projects taking into consideration protection from sexualexploitation and abuse issues% of projects seeking to address inequalities or protectionthreats, i.e. violence, coercion, exploitation, deprivation, or…
% of projects measuring access of beneficiaries?
% of projects measuring safety of beneficiaries?
% of projects measuring dignity of beneficiaries?
Percentage of projects including Centrality of Protection 
5668.60.114727.80.99CriticalHighMed/LowFunding requirementby project priority and Libyans and non-
LibyansLibyansNon-
LibyansFunding29%
8 (Decent Work and Economic Growth)
9 (Industry, Innovation and Infrastructure)
10 (Reduced Inequalities)
11 (Sustainable Cities and Communities)
12 (Responsible Production andConsumption)
13 (Climate Action)
14 (Life below Water)
15 (Life on Land)
16 (Peace, Justice and Strong Institutions)
17 (Partnerships for the Goals)
Total # of Entities/Agencies Providing SDG 
Support through various SF PillarsI 

Integrated Response Approaches

Integrated responses are a key a feature of humanitarian 
action in Libya in 2019, with the objective of maximizing 
impact. To this end, the humanitarian community has 
committed to scale up integrated programming approaches 
and foster inter-sectoral complementarity across projects, as 
well as multi-sectoral interventions. 

The HNO highlighted key areas of need that have 
guided inter-sectoral level response planning to ensure 
complementarity between projects. As a result, four integrated 
response approaches have been identified. These include 
responses in schools, health facilities, detention centres and 
support to IDPs and returnees. 

The integrated response approaches are built around both 
key thematic areas of intervention (i.e. schools/education and 
health facilities), and geographical locations of people in need 
(i.e. detention centres and areas of dispalcement and return). 



1. Integrated response in schools

Sectors involved: Education, WASH, Food Security, Protection 
(Child Protection and GBV), and Health

 
IN SCHOOLSIN HEALTH FACILITIESIN DETENTION CENTRESDISPLACED PEOPLE AND RETURNEES


The HNO findings indicate multiple serious issues in schools 
including, overcrowding, access to safe drinking water and 
sanitation facilities, and challenges related to child protection. 
The Education sector will work closely with other sectors 
to ensure a holistic humanitarian response approach in 
schools. The CP and GBV Working Groups will work closely 
with the Education Sector to ensure that education staff are 
adequately trained in CP and GBV referral mechanisms and 
existing services, to promote a safe environment in schools 
through feedback and complaints mechanisms, code of 
conduct for teachers, and to integrate CP and GBV messaging, 
amongst other activities. The Education Sector will focus on 
providing psychosocial support for boys and girls, enhancing 
teaching methodologies for teachers to improve the learning 
environment for children. The Sector will also work in 
community centres where vulnerable children can access 
various services such as protection and non-formal education 
services. The GBV Working Group will collaborate with 
the education sector in assessing the capacity of education 
programmes to safely and ethically respond to incidents of 
GBV reported by students. 

The CP Working Group will also strengthen its collaboration 
with the Food Security Sector to ensure referrals of at-risk 
children and their families to food security services and 
promote safe participation of at-risk adolescents to livelihoods 
and life skills activities. A feedback mechanism will also be 
established. In addition, the GBV working group will enhance 
awareness of food security staff on basic issues related to 
gender, GBV, human rights, social exclusion and sexuality, 
including knowledge of where survivors can report risk and 
access care, linkages between food security programming and 
GBV risk reduction.

The WASH Sector will undertake small scale repair and 
rehabilitation of gender-sensitive WASH facilities in public 
and community schools, including for refugees and migrants, 
ensuring schools most in need of support are reached in a 
timely and effective manner. As highlighted in the HNO, 
around 67 per cent of children in schools have limited 
access to water, 96 per cent have limited access to sanitation 
services, while 4 per cent have no sanitation services at all. An 
estimated 10 per cent of schools have water supplies that are 
contaminated with harmful bacteria. 

The Food Security Sector will work closely with education 
sector partners to deliver a school feeding programme to 
support 20,000 children in schools in the most severely 
affected areas. 

The Health Sector will work with the other sectors to 
implement a school health program which is essential for 
learning and increasing cognitive ability. Health, Education, 
WASH and Food Security sectors will collectively launch 
a Focusing Resources on Effective School Health (FRESH) 
framework that will be used as a platform to bring the 
four sectors together to respond to the basic needs of the 
schoolchildren, boost child care and development, ensure 
better educational outcomes, and achieve greater social 
equity. The FRESH framework will remain a coordination 
mechanism at school level to strengthen an effective 
partnership between teachers and health care workers, and 
community partnership and awareness of students. 

2. Integrated response in health facilities

Sectors involved: Health, WASH and Protection (CP and 
GBV).

IN SCHOOLSIN HEALTH FACILITIESIN DETENTION CENTRESDISPLACED PEOPLE AND RETURNEES


Based on HNO findings some of the most severe and 
widespread needs in Libya are linked to challenges to access 
primary and secondary healthcare services. The Health 
Sector will work closely with WASH and Protection partners 
to deliver integrated services that mitigate health risks and 
contribute to enabling the effective delivery of healthcare 
services. Partners will adopt integrated protection and 
health activities to maximize coverage of vulnerable groups 
(especially women and children) and to allow flexibility 
to respond to unpredictable escalations of violence in the 
wider community, whilst retaining the capacity to intervene 
where women and children are particularly exposed to risks. 
Programmatic synergies between WASH and Health sectors 
include the improvement of sanitation systems in health 
facilities, ensuring the availability of clean and safe water in 
targeted health facilities, integration of hygiene promotion 
activities into health education sessions, distribution of 
water purifying Aquatabs through medical teams and health 
awareness programming, and working closely together in 
the prevention and treatment of water borne diseases. Both 
Health and WASH sectors will link to rapidly respond to the 
alerts raised by the diseases surveillance reports.

The Health and Protection sectors will work together to 



ensure community engagement, accountability to affected 
people, and equal access to health services. Both sectors 
will ensure the delivery of a comprehensive package of 
mental health and psychosocial support at both clinical and 
community levels. Furthermore, GBV Working Group will 
further collaborate with the Health Sector to implement 
strategies that maximize the quality of survivor care at health 
facilities including implementation of standardized guidelines 
for the clinical care of sexual assault, establishing private 
consultation rooms, maintaining adequate supplies and 
medical drugs, and providing follow-up services.

3. Integrated response in detention centres

Sectors involved: Protection (CP and GBV), Food Security, 
WASH, Shelter, and Health. 

IN SCHOOLSIN HEALTH FACILITIESIN DETENTION CENTRESDISPLACED PEOPLE AND RETURNEES


The humanitarian community strongly opposes the 
arbitrary detention of people in detention centres. However, 
partners acknowledge that detained people require 
critical humanitarian support and protection. As a result, 
humanitarian partners face an ethical dilemma, where on the 
one hand the provision of assistance in detention centres may 
contribute to sustaining the existence of detention facilities 
and the perpetuation of violations and abuses, and on the 
other hand humanitarians are driven by the principle of 
humanity and the obligation to deliver assistance and provide 
effective protection to minimize suffering wherever it is found. 

Libyan authorities are the primary duty bearers to provide 
humane treatment to detainees, and they have the resources 
to do so. Therefore, the provision of services and supplies by 
international actors should not substitute the role of Libyan 
authorities that manage detention centres. 

According to HNO findings, people in detention centres are 
considered some of the most vulnerable and are subjected to 
some of the most dire living conditions and risks. As a result, 
responding to the needs of people in detention centres is a 
priority, though the total number of people in Directorate for 
Combatting Illegal Migration (DCIM) run centres is low. 

Over the course of 2019 humanitarian partners will provide 
emergency meals to approximately 20,000 people who at some 
point during the course of the year are detained in DCIM 
facilities. Food will be provided on an emergency basis for the 
first days of detention until the DCIM establishes the regular 
provision of sufficient food in detention facilities. 

Protection partners will provide life-saving protection 
assistance and conduct protection risk monitoring and 
assessment for more than 6000 refugees and migrants in 
need of support in DCIM facilities at any given time. This 
will include specialized services to particularly vulnerable 
individuals in detention, such as GBV survivors, victims of 
trafficking and children, with a specific focus on separated and 
unaccompanied children, and children exposed to violence 
and abuse. 

Protection support services will include psychological, 
legal, family tracing and advocacy for release, and 
placement alternatives to detention for the most vulnerable. 
Considering the ensuing challenges in providing practical 
case management in the detention centres, the GBV Working 
Group, seeks to collaborate with the Health Sector to increase 
the accessibility of health and reproductive health services that 
integrate GBV-related interventions. 

WASH partners will work closely with other partners 
to ensure detained people have access to safe water and 
sanitation facilities in detention centres. Shelter and NFI 
partners will work to ensure detained people have access 
to critically needed NFIs, to alleviate suffering in harsh 
conditions during detention. 

Health sector partners will link with the WASH and 
Protection sectors to deliver a minimum package of primary 
health care services that will include immunization services, 
out-patient screening and treatment, safe motherhood 
services, management of common illnesses and referral 
of complicated cases. Partners will coordinate with the 
national health programs under the umbrella of national 
centre for disease control to identify and refer migrants with 
complicated illnesses including but not limited to Tuberculosis 
(TB), HIV, mental health disorders and other conditions to 
secondary health facilities without discrimination. The Health 
Sector will support other sectors that have interventions 
in the detention centres to develop a Minimum Assistance 
Package (MAP) that includes available, accessible, appropriate 
and affordable services. The Health Sector will also negotiate 
with health authorities at national and local levels to ensure 
full access of migrants to secondary services without any 
discrimination. 



4. Integrated response to support internally displaced 
people (IDPs) and returnees

Sectors involved: WASH, Shelter, Food Security, Education, 
Health and Protection (CP, GBV and Mine Action)

DETENTION CENTRESDISPLACED PEOPLE AND RETURNEES


Based on the HNO findings, there are an estimated 97,000 
IDPs and 165,000 returnees in need of assistance. Based on 
analysis of humanitarian access, needs severity, and response 
capacity in 2019, partners in the HRP aim to target 65,000 
IDPs and 85,500 returnees, providing critical support during 
displacement and supporting people to return to their homes. 

With displacement and returns expected to remain as 
prominent features of the crisis, the humanitarian community 
aims to work together to provide support to both displaced 
people and to support safe, dignified and voluntary returns 
in 2019, in line with the Guiding Principles on Internal 
Displacement.3
3 https://www.unocha.org/sites/dms/Documents/GuidingPrinciplesDispl.pdf

 It is critical that the primary role of the 
national authorities in providing support and respecting the 
rights of displaced people is acknowledged and considered in 
humanitarian response implementation. 

For many displaced people aiming to return, key priorities 
include ensuring conflict has ceased, areas of return are 
safe and clear from Explosive Remnants of War (ERW) 
contamination, and no threats from neighbouring 
communities or militias. Immediate support including but not 
limited to food, WASH, Shelter and NFI, Protection, and cash 
assistance is required. Access to functional public services 
including healthcare facilities and schools is also critical. In 
the longer term, however, social cohesion between host and 
displaced communities, and support to rebuild communities, 
and re-establish income-generating and livelihoods 
opportunities is critical for durable solutions to displacement. 
Building on the foundations of the humanitarian response, 
these should be provided through stabilization and 
development assistance. 

In 2019, the Displacement Tracking Matrix (DTM) will 
continue to track displacement patterns, trends and needs in 
Libya, complemented by assessments such as the Multi-Sector 
Needs Assessment (MSNA) and many others highlighted in 
the HNO. 

The Humanitarian-Development-Peace nexus

This plan is based on the understanding that a multitude 
of actors are pursuing humanitarian, development and 
stabilization objectives in parallel to help the country move 
forward. While the HRP aims to address severe and critical 
humanitarian needs, activities targeting other issues including 
those related to structural and economic challenges in Libya, 
will be addressed by development and stabilization assistance.

To enable complementarity between humanitarian action and 
development support, the HCT will increase joint efforts to 
explore ways for humanitarian and development partners to 
better coordinate assistance. This approach is in line with the 
Secretary General’s Agenda for Humanity, the Grand Bargain 
global commitments and the principles of the New Way of 
Working, calling for collective and coherent support to reduce 
people’s needs and vulnerabilities, based on comparative 
advantages and over a multi-year horizon.

UN STRATEGIC FRAMEWORK (UNSF) PROGRAMME 
FUNDING REQUIREMENTS

including Centrality of Protection 
LowFunding requirementby Libyans and non-
Shortfall71%
UN Strategic Framework (UNSF) programmes funding 
requirementsTotalrequirements$378M93M792062568205864142I - Governanceand Rule ofLaw OutcomeAreaII - EconomicRecovery andGrowthOutcomeIII - Access toSocial ServicesOutcome AreaUN Strategic Framework (UNSF)programmes funding 
requirements by result groupShortfallRequired budgetFunding01020304050607080901 requirement 
by sector and nationalityLibyansNon 

Critical sectors for linking humanitarian aid and development 
assistance include the Health, Education and WASH sectors, 
which have suffered significantly as a result of the inability 
of the Government to perform core government functions 
leading to a continuous deterioration of public services. For 
example, while providing medical supplies and equipment 
through humanitarian aid, health partners have also been 
working very closely with government institutions and the 
Ministry of Health to rehabilitate destroyed or partially 
damaged medical facilities, strengthen capacity of medical 
personnel, and reform the public health system through 
stabilization and development interventions. Last year, the 
Health Sector also adopted a Minimum Health Service 
Package (MHSP) that standardizes the primary and secondary 
health services, piloting the package in four districts of Libya. 
In 2019, the Health Sector will advocate for the integration 
of MHSP into the district development plans with the use of 
available national resources in order to minimize the reliance 
on international aid and shift gradually from emergency 
response based on ad-hoc plans to long-term development 
plans. The ultimate goal is to transition to the implementation 
of Essential Health Service Package (EHSP) with a fully-
fledged health system. 

While the WASH Sector assists people in need through water 



trucking, at the same time, WASH partners also support 
development initiatives by helping state institutions to 
rehabilitate WASH infrastructures and maintain municipal 
wellfields managed by the General Company for Water 
and Wastewater, so to reduce reliance on water trucking. 
Partners are also exploring ways to support the Man-Made 
River Project, an underground network of water pipes and 
aqueducts, which provides safe drinking water to 60 per cent 
of the Libyan population, including in the main cities, and 
which requires regular maintenance and rehabilitation. 

Education partners continue to support strengthening both 
national systems and community-based structures to facilitate 
access to quality education for all vulnerable girls and boys, 
irrespective of their legal status in the country to respond to 
the education needs of children as part of its humanitarian-
development nexus plan. By focusing on the three objectives 
of access, quality and education system strengthening, the 
Sector contributes to the Sustainable Development Goal 
(SDG) 4 (Ensure inclusive and equitable quality education 
and promote lifelong learning opportunities for all) and 
to the overall education reform of the system. Planned 
response interventions will be further strengthened through 
longer term development plans of system strengthening that 
include the establishment of the Education Management 
Information System (EMIS), which will improve evidence-
based interventions to the most vulnerable. Furthermore, 
teacher training interventions through this response will 
also contribute to the overall Ministry of Education vision of 
capacity building for teachers that will enhance the quality of 
education for children. 

UN STRATEGIC FRAMEWORK (UNSF) PROGRAMMES 
FUNDING REQUIREMENTS BY RESULT GROUP

Shortfall71%
UN Strategic Framework (UNSF) programmes funding 
requirementsTotalrequirements$378M93M792062568205864142I - Governanceand Rule ofLaw OutcomeAreaII - EconomicRecovery andGrowthOutcomeIII - Access toSocial ServicesOutcome AreaUN Strategic Framework (UNSF)programmes funding 
requirements by result groupShortfallRequired budgetFunding01020304050607080901 requirement 
by sector and nationalityLibyansNon Libyans


The United Nations Strategic Framework for Libya

The UN Strategic Framework (UNSF) 2019-2020 provides 
the overarching strategic guidance for international collective 
efforts in support of all people across Libya. The UNSF 
adopts an integrated approach responding to development 
priorities and building on complementary activities with 
relief assistance. To this end, it addresses structural issues that 
are negatively affecting domestic capacity to provide basic 
social services. The UNSF consists of three strategic outcomes 
focusing on strengthening governance and rule of law, 
promoting economic recovery and growth, and supporting 
sustained basic social services. International support through 
the UNSF takes place at policy level (upstream) and at 
community level (downstream). Its focus on improving 
the capacity of Libyan institutions to design, develop and 
implement social policies for quality social services (outcome 
three) is particularly relevant to humanitarian aid, as it aims 
to tackle some of the structural issues driving humanitarian 
needs. 

Under the framework of the UNSF, multiple programmes and 
initiatives have been implemented/initiated by development 
partners in Libya to help the country move forward, including 
the Stabilization Facility for Libya (SFL) and the UNDP 
Resilience Programme.

TOTAL # OF ENTITIES/AGENCIES PROVIDING SDG SUPPORT 
THROUGH VARIOUS SF PILLARS

% of projects identifying and addressing barriers to access thatdifferent population groups could face in relation to the project% of projects taking into consideration protection from sexualexploitation and abuse issues% of projects seeking to address inequalities or protectionthreats, i.e. violence, coercion, exploitation, deprivation, or…
% of projects measuring access of beneficiaries?
% of projects measuring safety of beneficiaries?
% of projects measuring dignity of beneficiaries?
Percentage of projects including Centrality of Protection 
5668.60.114727.80.99CriticalHighMed/LowFunding requirementby project priority and Libyans and non-
LibyansLibyansNon-
LibyansFunding29%
(No Poverty)
2 (Zero Hunger)
3 (Good Health and Well-Being)
4 (Quality Education)
5 (Gender Equality)
6 (Clean Water and Sanitation)
7 (Affordable and Clean Energy)
8 (Decent Work and Economic Growth)
9 (Industry, Innovation and Infrastructure)
10 (Reduced Inequalities)
11 (Sustainable Cities and Communities)
12 (Responsible Production andConsumption)
13 (Climate Action)
14 (Life below Water)
15 (Life on Land)
16 (Peace, Justice and Strong Institutions)
17 (Partnerships for the Goals)
Total # of Entities/Agencies Providing SDG 
Support through various SF PillarsI - Governance and Rule of LawII - Economic Recovery and GrowthIII - Access to Social Services88212516359484418621105CommonservicesEducationFoodSecurityHealthMPCAProtectionShelter/

While development and stabilization support is provided by 
multiple partners, it is worth noting that Libya is not eligible 
for funding from the World Bank under the framework of 
International Development Association 18 for fragile and 
conflict-affected countries. At the same time, funding from 
the International Bank of Reconstruction and Development 
(IBRD) may not be immediately forthcoming. But, there 
may be an option once there is more political stability. As of 
2019, the World Bank Country Engagement Note for Libya 
focuses on two pillars: i) macro-economic stability, public 
finance mechanisms, and governance and ii) basic services 
(mainly health, education, energy and migration). In 2019, the 
World Bank, in close cooperation with the UN and the EU, 
will conduct a Risk and Recovery Peacebuilding Assessment 
(RPBA) which will constitute the basis for collective and 



coherent development programming going forward. The 
humanitarian community follows closely these developments 
to promote synergies and complementary approaches.

Response modalities

Delivery of humanitarian assistance will be undertaken 
through different modalities. The main response modalities 
are in-kind distribution (e.g. food, NFIs, etc.), public-
service system support, and use of emergency cash. In order 
to rapidly respond to emerging needs, there is already an 
established Health Sector Rapid Response Framework (RRF). 
In addition, the HCT is also establishing a multi-sector Rapid 
Response Mechanism (RRM). 

In-kind Assistance

In-kind assistance includes the delivery of critical and basic 
household goods and commodities including food, non-food 
items and other materials that people need, such as shelter 
repair kits. 

Public-service system support

Support to institutions delivering critical public services 
including is a critical response modality for humanitarian 
partners in 2019, given that some of the greatest needs in 
Libya are caused by the deterioration of public services. The 
humanitarian community continues to support national and 
local partners, by strengthening their capacity to respond to, 
and assist the people most in need. Local authorities, such as 
local crisis committees and municipalities, play a vital role as 
the first responders to people’s needs, and will continue to play 
a key role in implementing response operations. National and 
local civil society organizations are also important partners. 
However, the number of Libyan NGOs that have adequate 
capacity to deliver assistance is quite limited, resulting in 
several international organizations utilizing the services of the 
same small number of national partners, which threatens their 
ability to deliver effectively and at scale. 

Multi-Purpose Cash Assistance 

Having identified a lack of access to sufficient cash as a key 
issue preventing affected people to access basic goods and 
services, humanitarian partners will use Multi-Purpose Cash 
Assistance (MPCA) as a response modality to meet the most 
urgent basic needs in areas where markets are functioning, 
accessible, and the safe delivery of cash is possible. MPCA 
will be used to support both Libyans and non-Libyans. 
MPCA will be provided to people that have been assessed 
against harmonized socio-economic vulnerability criteria 
based on household level assessments. MPCA is considered 
a critical response in the context of the Libya crisis as it can 
be delivered in a flexible way and a manner that allows and 
enables choice and dignity. 

MPCA is operationalized in close collaboration with all 
sectors, with oversight of MPCA at the inter-sectoral level, 
coordinated through the Cash Working Group (CWG). There 
are two types of MPCA assistance; the provision of emergency 
one-off cash assistance to highly vulnerable households; and 
the provision of cash assistance for up to six months to highly 
vulnerable households. For further information please refer to 
the MPCA operational plan. 

Rapid Response 

The Rapid Response Mechanism (RRM) will be activated 
for emergency responses and to intervene in hard-to-
reach areas within a period of 72 hours to a week to assist 
otherwise inaccessible populations with urgent life-saving 
interventions. Through the RRM humanitarian partners 
will deliver immediate, life- saving supplies, services and 
direct cash assistance to families on the move fleeing conflict. 
The mechanism represents the initial emergency first-line 
response, to be then overtaken by the sector responses and 
to be coordinated through the Inter-Sector Coordination 
Group. The RRM aims to reach hard-to-reach areas, targeting 
migrants on the move, assisting refugees and collecting data 
on vulnerabilities of families, women and children. It aims to 
cover the needs of 30,000 people in onset emergencies and 
50,000 in hard-to-reach areas. Grounded in a partnership 
among UNICEF, WFP, IOM and UNFPA, the RRM will 
provide integrated assistance including food, basic WASH 
items, immediate psycho-social support, health services 
to mothers, pregnant and lactating women, and children 
under-five, nutrition screening, vaccinations, and mine-risk 
awareness services. 

In addition, a Rapid Response Framework (RRF), established 
by the Health Sector in 2018, will respond to urgent health 
needs of the affected population. Through the deployment 
of the RRF team, Health Sector partners will support health 
facilities assisting displaced families, highly vulnerable 
people in accessible areas and people who were cut-off by 
the conflict and lack substantive assistance. Rapid response 
interventions will include, among others, deployment of 
Interagency Emergency Health Kits, Emergency Trauma Kits, 
Interagency Reproductive Health Kits, as well as deployment 
of ambulances and mobile clinics and teams for outreach 
services. 

RESPONSE MODALITIES

Public-service system 
support•Support to basic service 
institutions/providers•strengthening of emergency 
response capacityMulti-Purpose Cash 
Assistance (MPCA)
•emergency one-off cash assistance 
•provision of cash assistance for up 
to six months 
In-kind assistance•Food•NFI•Shelter kit•Water truckingRRM/RRF•frontline emergency response•intervene in hard-to-reach areas 
with urgent life-saving 
interventions•respond to urgent health needs

The Refugee and Migrant Response

Of the estimated 823,000 people-in-need identified in the 
HNO, refugees and migrants are among the most vulnerable 
communities affected by the ongoing crisis. In addition to 
facing similar challenges as the Libyan population, many of 
the estimated 670,0004
4 IOM-DTM, Round 21 Migrant Report, September 2018

 refugees and migrants in Libya are 
discriminated against and excluded from accessing public 
services, and face substantial protection risks due to their 
unrecognized or irregular status in Libya.5
5 Whilst not a party to the 1951 Refugee Convention or its 1967 Protocol, 
multiple articles of which - notably those relating to the protection of refugees 
- are considered customary law, the Government of Libya is a party to the 
1969 OAU Convention Governing Specific Aspects of Refugee Problems in 
Africa (since 24 April 1984), to the Arab Charter of Human Rights (since 
26 March 1987), and the African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights 
(since 26 March 1987), whose legally binding provisions are not applied in 
Libya, thereby rendering asylum-seekers and refugees exposed and subject to 
arbitrary detention pursuant to Law. 19 (2010), which criminalizes irregular 
entrants to Libya (including migrants and persons of concern to UNHCR).

 Furthermore, 
migrants and refugees face extreme risks along the Central 
Mediterranean Route (CMR) and upon arrival in Libya, where 
they live in fear of trafficking, exploitation, sexual violence, 
unlawful killings, capture and arbitrary detention in official 
detention centres and clandestine holding facilities, forced 
labour camps, farms, warehouses, hangars, or makeshift 
prisons run by militia, smugglers, traffickers and other armed 
groups. 

TOTAL TARGETED MIGRANTS

MIGRANTS TARGETED BY MANTIKA *
70015,00041,000
ALGERIATUNISIAWESTSOUTHEASTEGYPTSUDANNIGERCHADAlkufraMurzuqEjdabiaSirtAljufraNalutGhatWadi AshshatiTobrukAl JabalAl GharbiMisrataDernaSebhaUbariBenghaziAlmarjAlmargebAl JabalAl AkhdarZwaraAljfaraAzzawyaTripoliGREECEITALYCYPRUSMediterranean Sea177KTotal targetedmigrants


TOTAL TARGETED REFUGEES

REFUGEES TARGETED BY MANTIKA *
3003,50013,50056KTotal targetedrefugeesALGERIATUNISIAWESTSOUTHEASTEGYPTSUDANNIGERCHADAlkufraMurzuqEjdabiaSirtAljufraNalutGhatWadi AshshatiTobrukAl JabalAl GharbiMisrataDernaSebhaUbariBenghaziAlmarjAlmargebAl JabalAl AkhdarZwaraAljfaraAzzawyaTripoliGREECEITALYCYPRUSMediterranean Sea


In addition to the prevailing volatile security situation, 
particularly for refugees and migrants living in urban areas, 
limited protection space and arbitrary access constraints, 
imposed by national actors, impact humanitarian response 
and timely delivery of assistance. Challenges in access are 
further augmented in the East and South, owing to the 
political divisions in the country and security constraints. 

Response Priorities

The humanitarian response will target 230,000 refugees and 
migrants out of the 414,000 identified as in need. The targeted 
refugees and migrants include those who are considered 
the most vulnerable and/or severely affected by the crisis. 
Response priorities in 2019 will include, the provision of life 
saving and protection assistance for refugees and migrants in 
urban areas, areas of active conflict who are exposed to high 
risks, and for the approximately 6,700 refugees and migrants 
being held in inhumane conditions in DCIM operated 
detention centres.6
6 IOM, UNHCR, October 2018. The number of official detention centres 
operating fluctuates as does the number of migrants held therein, depending 
on the political/conflict context, returns to home countries, the migratory and 
smuggling trends as well as the number of migrants disembarked on Libyan 
shores as a result of Libyan Coast Guard rescue operations at sea.



Key response activities include addressing immediate needs 
related to access to cash, food, non-food items, shelter, 
education, health, protection services and WASH. Critical 
priorities also include supporting self-reliance and resilience, 
strengthening efforts to enhance humanitarian access, 
improving conditions in detentions centres and advocating 



for the establishment of alternatives to detention.7
7 See hereto advocacy notes of the Mixed Migration Working Group on the 
situation of detained refugees and migrants (http://mmwg-libya.org/wp/wp-
content/uploads/2018/03/MMWG-Advocacy-Paper-March-2018.pdf) , as well 
as on the food situation in government-operated detention centres (http://
mmwg-libya.org/wp/wp-content/uploads/2018/03/MMWG-Note-on-Food-at-
DCs.pdf). 

 Other 
priority areas are ensuring that migrants and refugees have 
equal access to critical services, such as basic health services, 
and augmenting specialized services such as structured 
psychosocial support. 

The response also aims to provide livelihoods support and 
community-based protection services, while expanding 
humanitarian programmes in areas where there are high 
numbers of refugees and migrants, supporting community 
social cohesion efforts, and assisting refugees and migrants to 
obtain official civil status documentation.

Overarchingly, capacity building efforts will be strengthened, 
along with partnerships and coordination, to reinforce the 
skills and technical capabilities and competences of Libyan 
institutions and authorities to respond to the humanitarian 
and wider needs of migrants and refugees in Libya. This 
includes migration governance and management (including 
humanitarian border management, registration, and 
countering human trafficking among other activities) and 
strengthening the understanding of applicable International 
Refugee Law, International Humanitarian Law (IHL) and 
International Human Rights Law, as it pertains to the situation 
of refugees and migrants in Libya. Libyan institutions 
and authorities, which have the primary responsibility for 
the protection and well-being of all persons in Libya, and 
humanitarian partners will continue to work together to 
address the needs of refugees and migrants. 

Within the framework of the 2019 HRP, humanitarian 
partners will also work towards strengthening data collection 
and analysis on key thematic topics and trends related to 
refugee and migrants in Libya. A Refugee and Migrant 
Platform (RMP) is being established in support of the 
humanitarian response in 2019. 

Links between humanitarian action, broader migration 
management, development and peace

Humanitarian partners will work together to provide 
immediate assistance to refugees and migrants in-need 
complementing broader support for refugees and migrants 
in Libya. Though outside the framework of the HRP, working 
towards enhancing solutions for refugees and migrants 
stranded in Libya, IOM and UNHCR continue to support 
voluntary humanitarian returns (VHR), resettlement, 
complementary legal pathways and other durable solutions. 
Economic factors and poor essential basic services delivery 
have a large impact on challenges in absorbing increased 
migration flows. The large presence of migrants has increased 
pressure on local host communities, particularly in southern 
border towns which are often also affected by large influxes 
of IDPs. Relations between host communities, IDPs, refugees 
and migrants are often strained leading to tensions and 
clashes. Improving livelihood opportunities and living 
conditions, through the provision of short-term opportunities 
and rehabilitation of essential services and infrastructure, 
such as community stabilization initiatives and quick-impact 
projects (QIPs), is therefore considered a critical contribution 
towards strengthened community stability and resilience. 
Such initiatives will be overseen and coordinated under 
development and stabilization mechanisms.

FUNDING REQUIREMENTS BY LIBYAN AND NON-LIBYAN

- Governanceand Rule ofLaw OutcomeAreaII - EconomicRecovery andGrowthOutcomeIII - Access toSocial ServicesOutcome AreaUN Strategic Framework (UNSF)programmes funding 
requirements by result groupShortfallRequired budgetFunding01020304050607080901 Poverty)
Hunger)
Being)
Education)
Equality)
Sanitation)
Energy)
Growth)
Infrastructure)
Inequalities)
Communities)
Production andConsumption)
Action)
Water)
on Land)
Institutions)
Goals)
through various SF PillarsI Rule of LawII - Economic Recovery and GrowthIII Services88212516359484418621105CommonservicesEducationFoodSecurityHealthMPCAProtectionShelter/NFIWASHFunding requirement 
by sector and nationalityLibyansNon Libyans




OPERATIONAL

CAPACITY

In February 2018, the international community began to re-establish its 
presence in Libya. Though the full relocation of international staff to Libya 
and the establishment of full-fledged capacity on the ground have yet to be 
completed, efforts are ongoing to ensure a significantly increased humanitarian 
presence in the coming months.

The humanitarian community works together with national 
and local authorities, such as local crisis committees 
and municipalities, and national and local civil society 
organizations as the first responders to people’s needs. While 
the number of Libyan NGOs has increased over the years, 
local partners with adequate capacity to deliver sufficient 
assistance remain limited. This has resulted in several 
international organizations heavily relying on a small number 
of national and local partners, and in turn stretching the 
partner abilities to deliver. To this end, humanitarian actors 
will explore ways to undertake coordinated capacity building 
of national and local partners by pooling resources, joint 
planning, and sharing knowledge and specialized skills. 

The split between Tunis- and Libya-based teams has created 
coordination and communication challenges, and impacted 
response operations. In 2019, the HCT will give priority to 
Libya-based coordination structures, now that the majority 
of stakeholders are expected to return to Libya. To this end, 
building on lessons learned from the recent emergency 
response in Tripoli, and following recommendations from 
a high-level mission of INGOs, OCHA, IOM and UNHCR 
headquarters in September 2018, the HCT is committed 
to strengthen area-based coordination groups (ACGs) in 
locations where needs are documented and implementation 
capacity exists. The Inter-Sector Coordination Group (ISCG) 
will provide technical and advisory support to the ACGs, as 
required. 

Mindful of the importance to scale up assistance beyond 
Tripoli to respond to the needs of the most vulnerable 
groups across Libya in a timely and effective manner, the 
HCT is committed to strengthen its operational capacity in 
the East and in the South. In order to achieve this goal, an 
operational hub is being established in Benghazi, and options 
reviewed for an increased presence in Sebha in the future. The 
Logistics and Emergency Telecommunications (ET) sectors 
will support the implementation of these decisions, aiming 
to provide logistics and telecommunication support to the 
humanitarian community. As part of the 2019 HRP, these 
sectors plan to facilitate logistics and air transport services, 
internet connectivity and security telecommunications 
primarily in the main hubs of Tripoli, Benghazi, and Sebha, 
and potentially expanding activities to hard-to-reach and 
neglected areas, based on operational bottlenecks, response 
priorities, and humanitarian presence, to enhance the ability 
of the humanitarian community to deliver relief items where 
most needed.

# OF HUMANITARIAN PARTNERS

51*

615149720811105202351410911ALGERIATUNISIAWESTSOUTHEASTEGYPTSUDANNIGERCHADAlkufraMurzuqEjdabiaSirtAljufraNalutGhatWadi AshshatiTobrukAl JabalAl GharbiMisrataDernaSebhaUbariBenghaziAlmarjAlmargebAl JabalAl AkhdarZwaraAljfaraAzzawyaTripoliGREECEITALYCYPRUSMediterranean Sea51Total numberof organizations and partners16921322 red cross/crescent organizationsOffices4 government partners7 UN organizations17 international NGOs21 national NGOsTargets by MantikaLess than 7,0007,000 - 15,00015,000 - 35,00035,000 - 75,00075,000 - 150,000
* This number includes organizations appealing for funding directly 
under the HRP as well as implementing partners



HUMANITARIAN

ACCESS

Libya continues to be an unstable, complex and dynamic operating 
environment, in which humanitarian access, and response planning and 
coordination remain challenging. Fighting between forces allied with the 
Government of National Accord (GNA) and the House of Representatives (HoR), 
and clashes between tribal militias have perpetuated a state of chaos and 
instability.

The conflict has contributed to dividing Libya into geographic 
territories of control under different armed groups and tribal 
militias. With multiple stakeholders controlling different 
territories, humanitarian partners continue to face major 
challenges to establish predictable, rapid and unimpeded 
humanitarian access, and continue to face security risks 
when operating in Libya. With revenue streams significantly 
reduced, many armed groups are resorting to different ways 
to finance themselves. As a result the threats of kidnapping, 
abduction, and harassment remain major issues for 
humanitarian personnel in Libya. 

Criminality, the presence of hostile/extremist groups and 
aggression towards aid workers are all factors that impact 
humanitarian access to people in need of assistance. 
The presence of explosive hazards including landmines, 
unexploded ordnance, improvised explosive devices, can also 
pose a major risk in Libya. 

Humanitarian partners have also faced operational 
constraints due to arbitrary administrative requirements and 
varied bureaucratic processes, rules and regulations across the 
different regions (complex registration procedures, delays in 
importing humanitarian commodities, risk of confiscation of 
aid related items in some supply routes, etc.). Such issues can 
represent a significant obstacle to the delivery of timely and 
unhindered assistance. 

In general Libya has well-developed civil infrastructure 
but mainly concentrated along coastal areas, and in and 
around the main cities. Road networks are generally in 
good condition and connect main hubs along the coast as 
well as Libya to Tunisia and Egypt, though there have been 
some damages, blockages and lack of critical maintenance 
due to the conflict. Major ports include Tripoli, Benghazi, 
Khoms, and Marsa el-Brega. Libya has several main civilian 
airports with paved runways as well as military and smaller 
airfields across the territory. Access to electricity and 
telecommunication connectivity varies across the country, 
impacting the ability of humanitarian partners to operate 
effectively. There are many people in Libya who live in areas 
that are challenging to access due to the remoteness of villages 
and towns. 

Humanitarian access to DCIM facilities has improved in 
2018 and in the coming year the humanitarian community 
will continue to advocate for improved access to people being 
detained. Access to informal detention centres is non-existent, 
primarily due to political barriers, limited information, and 
security related issues. The humanitarian community has 
grave concerns about the conditions of life and human rights 
violations and abuse of people being held in clandestine 
facilities that are in essence smuggler holding centres and/
or forced labour camps in farms, warehouses and makeshift 
prisons run by armed groups.

The HCT is developing an access strategy in order to both 
increase humanitarian access to reach people and deliver 
assistance, as well as to enable affected people to seek out and 
obtain humanitarian aid. Guided by humanitarian principles, 
partners will continue to engage with authorities and other 
relevant stakeholders, in order to ensure humanitarian access 
and enable the delivery of critically needed assistance in areas 
under the control or influence of militia groups, building trust 
and acceptance as a measure to deliver effectively. 



LIBYA HUMANITARIAN ACCESS MAP 2018

Umm AranebGhadames
!
!!
!
!
!!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!!
!
!
!!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
AlkufraMurzuqEjdabiaSirtAljufraNalutGhatWadi AshshatiTobrukAl Jabal 
Al GharbiMisrataDernaSebhaUbariBenghaziAlmarjAlmargebAl JabalAl AkhdarZwaraAljfaraAzzawyaTripoliLimited access constraintsInternational and national humanitarian organizations can operate in 
these areas with a high level of confidence related to the security and 
safety of staff, and very limited impediments and operational risks. 
Low access constraints 
International and national humanitarian organizations can operate in 
these areas with confidence related to the staff safety and security, few 
serious impediments and low levels of operational risks. 
Medium access constraintsInternational and national humanitarian organizations can operate in 
these areas with caution related to the staff safety and security. There 
are reports of serious impediments and increased operational risks in 
these areas. 
High access constraints 
International and national humanitarian organizations can operate in 
these areas with a high level of caution related to staff safety and security. 
There are frequent serious impediments and high operational risks in 
these areas. Access restrictions for international organizations are higher 
than national organizations. 
Extremely high access constraints 
International and national humanitarian organizations can operate in these areas with a very high 
level of caution related to staff safety and security. There are constant serious impediments and very 
high operational risks in these areas. Access restrictions for international organizations are much higher 
than for national organizations. Access for international organizations is sporadic and requires extensive 
security management. 
AlwahatShweirefBarak ShatiQatrounMizda!
Bani walid!

RESPONSE

MONITORING

Response monitoring in 2019 will build on current practices and gauge 
progress against the HRP targets throughout the year. The HCT will use 
response monitoring to help guide strategic decision-making. Volatility in 
the situation and changes to humanitarian access make regular response 
monitoring even more important to ensure humanitarian activities are relevant 
to the needs of affected people.

Strenthen monitoring efforts to inform an adaptive and flexible 
response 

Since the beginning of the crisis, fluidity and unpredictability 
of the operating environment have represented a major 
challenge to response operations in Libya. Continued 
conflicts, sudden escalations of violence, recurrent shifts of 
areas of control, proliferation of armed groups and political 
instability have complicated delivery of humanitarian 
assistance and related monitoring efforts. In 2019, the 
humanitarian community is committed to strengthen its 
operational capacity to respond and to regularly monitor 
needs and response efforts. Monitoring information and 
data will be analysed regularly to support adjustments to the 
response, as required, to meet evolving or emerging needs.

Improved monitoring data, analyses and products to inform 
decisions and advocacy 

The Inter-Sector Coordination Group (ISCG) and the 
Information Management and Assessment Working Group 
(IMAWG) will ensure regular monitoring, analysis and 
reporting on the HRP, at the operational and strategic 
levels. They will support monitoring response activities, 
through 4W updates on a monthly basis, also contributing 
to monthly funding updates, and snapshots of the evolution 
of the humanitarian situation. Quarterly dashboards on the 
response reflecting monitoring information, related analysis 
of response achievements and gaps, evolution of needs, and 
recommended adjustments to response operations will be 
produced to inform HCT decisions, as well as advocacy 
efforts with donors and partners. A Periodic Monitoring 
Report (PMR) will be developed mid-2019 and at the end of 
2019. 

The ISCG and the IMAWG will strengthen engagement with 
all humanitarian partners to promote coordinated and multi-
sectoral needs assessments and timely and effective analyses 
of data collected. Key planned assessments next year include 
the Multi-Sector Needs Assessment (MSNA) for Libyans, 
the MSNA for refugees and migrants, the Joint Market 
Monitoring Initiative (JMMI), Mixed Migration Trends 
in Libya, Population Profiling, the Displacement Tracking 
Mechanism (DTM) and many more. More information is 
available in the HNO.

Innovative tools and systems to enable a more effective 
coordination of response operations

The HPC Response Planning Module (RPM) tool was 
utilized to develop the monitoring framework of the HRP 
and will be used to report on the HRP indicators during the 
implementation of the plan. The ISCG and IMAWG will also 
explore the use of other complementary and integrated e-tools 
that could further strengthen data compilation and reporting. 
The DTM remains a critical source of information for the 
international community to monitor population movements 
in the country and collect, analyse, and share comprehensive 
information on IDPs, returnees and migrant and refugee 
populations.

MAY4WsFunding UpdateDashboardMonitoring ReportHumanitarian Needs OverviewHumanitarian Response PlanJANDECNOVOCTSEPAUGJULJUNAPRMARFEBJAN20192020
HUMANITARIAN 
PROGRAMME CYCLE 
TIMELINE



SUMMARY OF

NEEDS, TARGETS & 
REQUIREMENTS 

PEOPLE IN NEED

823K

PEOPLE TARGETED

552K

REQUIREMENTS (US$)

202M

In 2019, humanitarian partners will target 552,000 people 
across Libya. 58 per cent are Libyans (IDPs, returnees, non-
displaced and host communities) and 42 per cent migrants 
and refugees. While 51 per cent of the Libyans targeted are 
women, the large majority (78 per cent) of targeted non-
Libyans are men, as the refugee and migrant population 
mainly constitutes of young men travelling alone. 

Methodology for people targeted

The overall number of people targeted in the HRP is 
calculated based on the maximum number of people targeted 
by each of the sectors, per population group, per mantika. 
With this approach, the total number of people targeted for 
humanitarian assistance in 2019 is 552,000. It is of note that 
the sum total of people targeted is higher than any individual 
sector target, as the sum figure reflects the range and diversity 
of people being targeted according to different population 
groups across Libya. 

Achieving the objectives set in the plan will require US$ 
202 million. The reduced funding requirement compared 
to 2018 is due to a more focused humanitarian response, 
targeting people who are the most severely in need and 
vulnerable groups, based on a robust and refined needs 
analysis. Total funding requirements are based on a project-
costing methodology, i.e. resulting from the aggregation of 
all endorsed projects. Strategic Advisory Groups thoroughly 
reviewed all projects, ensured relevance to the HRP Strategic 
Objectives, inter-sectoral response priorities and sector 
strategies, and prioritized them in line with agreed inter-
agency prioritization criteria. The refugee and migrant 
response will be operationalized through the sectors and is 
therefore reflected across the relevant sectors operational 
plans. The response to refugees and migrants represents 38 
per cent of the total budget.

A. Children (<18 years old), adult (18-65 years), elderly (>65 years) 
B. Total figure is not the total of the column, as the same people may be targeted by multiple sectorsTOTAL$202M39%
BREAKDOWN OF TARGETED554K490K292K298K267K93K-
-
388K234K195K197K150K71K74K-
34%
45%
36%
46%
43%
42%
45%
26 | 72 | 2%
38 | 57 | 5%
31 | 62 | 7%
36 | 60 | 4% 
34 | 63 | 3%
100 | 0 | 0%
34 | 61 | 5%
-
43.5M 
53.9M18.3M24.4M9.50M12.2M23.2M16.5M33 | 64 | 3%
HealthProtectionShelter & NFIsFood securityWASHEducationMulti purpose cashCommon servicesRefugees 
/asylum-
seekersMigrantsIDPsReturnees% femaleTotal% children, 
adults, elderly 
ABY STATUSTOTALBY SEX & AGEREQUIREMENTS (US$)
PeopletargetedNon 
displacedPeople in need38K 175K 39K 86K 51K55K 75K 65K 22K 17K20K 50K 36K 73K 16K12K 27K 33K 18K 107K8K 32K 24K 48K 39K21K 24K 8K 8K 10K11K - 45K 6K 11K- - - - - -
Sector823KB552KB56KB73KB116KB130KB$76M18.3M20.6M9.74M3.86M5.30M4.10M5.82M8.32MRefugees/migrants/asylum-
seekers177KB

PART II: OPERATIONAL

RESPONSE PLANS

Protection

Health

Water, Sanitation & Hygiene (WASH)

Shelter & Non-Food Items (NFIs)

Food Security

Education

Multi-Purpose Cash Assistance

Common Services (Logistic, Emergency 
Telecommunication, Coordination)



PROTECTION

PEOPLE IN NEED

490K

Priority Needs 

Seven years of conflict and widespread 
violations of International Human Rights 
Law, International Humanitarian Law and 
International Refugee Law have resulted 
in severe protection needs for IDPs, 
returnees, affected host communities, 
refugees and migrants. The Protection 
Sector identified 490,000 persons in need 
of protection in Libya. Priority needs are: 
1) access, and availability of specialized and 
other protection service for all population 
groups in need; 2) limited information on 
the protection situation of the different 
population groups across Libya to better 
mainstream protection across the overall 
response; 3) need for greater capacity of 
institutions and individuals to respond to 
identified protection needs through increased 
community-based protection mechanisms.

Response Strategy 

Scope of the sector response 

In line with the HRP scope and targeting 
parametres, the Protection Sector (including 
its Child Protection, Gender Based Violence, 
and Mine Action Working Groups) targets 
234,000 persons in need for protection 
intervention and assistance, of which 104,000 
are Libyans and 130,000 non-Libyans. The 
calculation of people targeted was informed 
by the number of people reached by the 
Sector in 2018 (January-September 127,000; 
annual projection: 170,000), the planned 
scale up of activities by protection partners 
and their increased capacity and access. 

The geographic focus is on those areas 
with severe needs and large populations in 
need, in particular Tripoli, Benghazi, Sirt, 
Misrata and Sebha. Further priority is given 
to locations with high population density 
of Libyans and non-Libyans, including in 
DCIM-operated detention centres holding 
refugees and migrants in dire need.

Response priorities

While there was a significant increase 
in information collected in 2018, there 
are still overwhelming gaps in accurate 
and comprehensive protection data for 
vulnerable persons in conflict affected areas 
and refugees and migrants in urban areas. 
In 2019 the Sector response is inclusive 
of all population groups in need (IDPs, 
returnees, affected host community, refugees 
and migrants) and includes: 1) expansion 
of protection monitoring and of protection 
assessments, to identify needs and inform 
future programming; 2) expansion of 
quality specialized protection services and 
referral pathways to facilitate access; 3) 
continuation of capacity-building initiatives 
for stakeholders, including duty-bearers, 
national humanitarian actors and community 
members to identify/mitigate protection risks 

PEOPLE TARGETED

234K

REQUIREMENTS (US$)

53.9M

# OF PARTNERS

13

PROTECTION OBJECTIVE 1:

1Monitor and assess protection 
risks and violations to identify 
persons in need to inform the 
humanitarian response 

RELATES TO SO2 

PROTECTION OBJECTIVE 2

2Provide specialized protection 
assistance and services to 
vulnerable and conflict affected 
Libyans and non-Libyans 

RELATES TO SO2 

PROTECTION OBJECTIVE 3

3Engage with authorities and 
humanitarian partners to 
promote full adherence to 
international protection norms, 
humanitarian and human rights 
law and facilitate community-based 
approaches to protection

RELATES TO SO2 

BREAKDOWN OF PEOPLE IN NEED AND TARGETED BY STATUS, SEX AND AGE

125K 214K 93K 32K 26K 490K55K 75K 65K 22K 17K 234K31%
45%
RefugeesMigrantsIDPsReturneesNon displacedTotal%
female% children *
BY STATUSBY SEX & AGE*Children (<18 years old), adult (18-65 years), elderly (>65 
years)$53.9M%
adult*
%
elderly*
27%
38%
68%
57%
5%
5%
$20.6MPEOPLE IN NEED 
PEOPLE TARGETEDFINANCIAL 
REQUIREMENTS$33.3M

and improve service quality; 4) reinforcement 
of community-based approaches and 
services, through awareness-raising, social 
cohesion and community-based initiatives. 
Furthermore, for the urban-based non-
Libyan population in need the focus is on 
5) the provision of basic socio-economic 
support to individual refugees and migrants 
at specific risk of otherwise resorting to 
harmful coping strategies.

Refugees and migrants in detention: The 
provision of life-saving protection assistance, 
as well as protection risks monitoring and 
assessment for the more than 6,000 refugees 
and migrants held in DCIM-run detention 
centres continue to be an integral part of the 
sector’s response. This will include specialized 
services to particularly vulnerable individuals 
in detention. Services include psychosocial, 
legal, family tracing and advocacy for release 
and placement in alternatives to detention for 
the most vulnerable.

Gender-Based Violence (GBV): There are 
an estimated 125,000 people in need of GBV 
assistance in Libya. The GBV Working Group 
(GBV WG) seeks to strengthen the provision 
of specialized services by expanding its 
coverage to previously unaddressed areas, 
such as Sirt, Alkufra and Murzuq. It also aims 
to strengthen provision of GBV services in 
Tripoli, Sebha, Benghazi, Misrata and Sirt to 
enhance timely and safe access to services 
for 11,400 vulnerable individuals in need of 
GBV case management and psychosocial 
support. A GBV information management 
system will be rolled out at the inter-agency 
level to ensure improved advocacy and 
quality GBV programming in Libya. GBV 
referral pathways will be developed and 
shared with 100,000 community members 
in the above mentioned locations to help the 
most vulnerable Libyans and non- Libyan 
women, youth and children seek and receive 
the support they need. Partners will conduct 
additional GBV assessments, including safety 
audits in collective centres and IDP informal 
settlements. Partners will also strengthen 
local capacity to respond to, and prevent GBV, 
by providing tailored training to more than 
620 people. Furthermore, dignity kits will be 
distributed to more than 70,000 women and 
girls of reproductive age. 

Child Protection: An estimated 133,400 
children (53,400 girls and 80,000 boys) are 
in need of Child Protection services. The 
Child Protection Working Group (CPWG) 
is planning to address multiple needs of 
children and their caregivers by scaling 
up programmes, improving the quality 
of services and strengthening integrated 
approaches with other sectors. The CPWG 
is planning to reach 8,000 of the most 
vulnerable children, including children 
with disabilities and child survivors of GBV, 
through integrated case management and 
individual services to restore dignity and 
prevent further distress. Such specialized 
services include best interest assessments 
and determination for refugee and migrant 
children and reintegration services for 
children affected by armed conflict. 
The CPWG works with the Protection 
Sector, GBV WG and Mental Health and 
Psychosocial Support (MHPSS) Technical 
Group to develop a harmonized approach 
towards case management, including 
referrals. 88,000 children will be reached 
through social cohesion activities, and 
structured and sustained psychosocial 
support activities also targeting caregivers 
and community members. Increased efforts 
will be made to strengthen the collaboration 
with Protection, GBV and Mine Action 
partners to develop a harmonized approach 
towards data collection, messaging and 
development of inter-agency coordination 
and standard operating procedures. CPWG 
partners also aim to strengthen the capacity 
of local actors through mentoring and 
coaching. Accelerated efforts will be also 
made by responsible agencies to scale up 
monitoring of child rights violations. 

Mine Action: Civilians, especially IDPs, 
returnees, and refugees and migrants residing 
in affected areas, continue to be exposed 
to explosive hazards, such as landmines, 
unexploded/abandoned ordnance and other 
explosive remnants of war, which affect their 
physical security and access to services. The 
Mine Action Working Group (MAWG) 
focuses on: i) conducting Non-Technical 
Surveys (NTS) to assess the presence of 
explosive hazards and identify safe areas, ii) 
performing clearance of contaminated areas, 
ii) delivering Mine Risk Education for host 
communities, IDPs and returnees, to increase 
awareness of the risks of explosive hazards, 
and iv) providing specialized assistance 
to survivors of explosive hazards. These 
activities will take place in Tripoli, Benghazi, 
Tawergha, Sirt, Al Jabal Al Gharbi, Derna, 
Sebha, and Brak Al Shati. The MAWG will 
continue enhancing the capacity of national 
stakeholders and coordinate mine action 
operations and information management.

CONTACT

Yasin Abbas
Protection Sector 
Coordinator
Abbasy@unhcr.org

Maanasa Reddy
Protection Sector Co-
Coordinator
Pwg.cc@drc-libya.org



Integrated response approaches

The Protection Sector will actively pursue integrated response 
approaches in 2019 at different levels, including advocating for 
an inter-sectoral referral mechanism. The Protection Sector 
and its Working Groups work on an integrated response 
approach in collaboration with the Education, Food, Health, 
and Shelter sectors in schools, community centres, health 
facilities, and detention centres. Furthermore, in 2019, the 
Housing, Land, and Property Technical Group (HLP TG) will 
be established, in close collaboration with the Shelter Sector. 
The newly formed MHPSS Technical Group will increase 
the scale of their work and will report and coordinate with 
the Health and Protection sectors. The CP and GBV working 
groups will work closely with the Education Sector to ensure 
that education staff are adequately trained in CP and GBV 
referral mechanisms and existing services, promoting a 
safe environment in schools, and developing CP and GBV 
messaging, amongst other activities. The CP WG will also 
strengthen its collaboration with the Food Security Sector 
to ensure referrals of at-risk children and their families to 
food security services and promote safe participation of at-
risk adolescents to livelihoods and life skills activities. The 
Protection Sector will engage with all other sectors to increase 
protection mainstreaming, centrality of protection, and the 
identification of most vulnerable persons through protection 
monitoring activities. 

The Humanitarian-Development-Peace Nexus

The Protection Sector interventions will address immediate 
needs taking into account longer-term development and 
stabilization activities outside the HRP. By being “as local 
as possible, as international as necessary,” programmes aim 
to find a balance between local and international capacity 
and efforts, and to comply with the global commitments of 
the World Humanitarian Summit and the Grand Bargain, 
including the need to strengthen partnerships with national 
and local actors. The Protection Sector response for 2019 
contributes to the overall improvement of public services 
through local capacity building and enhanced community-
based protection mechanisms, including through the 
activation of sub-national area working groups. An increased 
focus will also be placed on social cohesion activities.

Key principles of the response: centrality of 
protection, gender and accountability to affected 
population

In line with the IASC policy on the Centrality of Protection, 
the Protection Sector supports all sectors, humanitarian 
partners and the HCT to ensure that the humanitarian 
response and all assistance is planned and implemented to 
promote the safety, dignity and rights of affected people. This 
includes development of concrete protection mainstreaming 
measures and actions, and integration of protection activities 
across all humanitarian programmes to create a protective 
environment for people in need. 

Response modalities

The Protection Sector response (including its Child 
Protection, GBV, and Mine Action Working Groups) broadly 
comprises activities which monitor, identify and assess 
protection needs, including human rights/ IHL violations, 
child right violations, GBV incidents, and overall civilian 
impacts, to advocate for (as it concerns Libyan nationals), and 
refer people to assistance to all sectors. Provision of direct 
protection and assistance activities include psychosocial 
support tailored to adults, children and GBV survivors, as well 
as other critical protection services, such as legal assistance, 
case management, survivors’ assistance, referral pathways 
and multi-sectoral GBV response, as well as cash assistance to 
address and remedy specific protection incidents or situations. 

Specific to refugees and migrants, urban protection 
infrastructure, including Community Day Centres and 
outreach mechanisms, such as the Migrant Resource and 
Response Mechanism (MRRM), remain fundamental tools to 
reach-out to urban refugees and migrants in a participatory 
and inclusive manner.



HEALTH

PEOPLE IN NEED

554K

Priority Needs 

The health system in Libya is fragile and 
fragmented, and the protracted crisis has 
weakened the technical and operational 
capacities of the health workforce. Migrants, 
displaced persons, refugees, vulnerable 
groups, people with special needs, including 
people with mental health problems and 
rural communities, have limited access 
to integrated essential health services due 
to shortage of medical equipment and 
medicines and inadequate competent health 
service providers. 17.5 per cent of hospitals, 
20 per cent of primary health care facilities 
and 18 specialized hospitals are partially 
damaged or completely destroyed. 

The spread of communicable and 
preventable diseases, as well as non-
communicable diseases (NCD) is one of 
the major challenges faced by most of the 
districts and municipalities. Weak disease 
surveillance, limited rapid response capacity 
and fragmented health system show a 
grim picture of universal health coverage 
indicators in Libya.

Response Strategy 

Scope of the sector response

In line with the HRP scope and targeting 
parameters, the Health Sector will prioritize 
areas with high and moderate needs severity. 
Areas with lower severity ranking but high 
scale of people in need will also be targeted. 
Findings from the HNO analysis, as well as 
other vulnerability assessments were used 
to define targeted people. People having 
chronic illnesses with limited or no access 
to medicines, people with mental health 
disorders and without access to integrated 
care and treatment support, people having 
physical disability without access to needed 
healthcare, pregnant and lactating women 
especially in hard-to-reach areas, people 
living in areas with damaged or destroyed 
health facilities and displaced families, 
migrants, refugees and returnees will be 
given the highest priority by the response. 
To improve access to integrated and essential 
health services, the Health Sector will also 
focus on addressing shortages of supplies and 
lack of adequate medical staff.

Response priorities

The Health Sector response will prioritize 
access to a minimum package of integrated 
health services at primary and secondary 
levels, strengthening disease surveillance, 
rapid response and effective response 
coordination, and strengthening the 
capacity of the health workforce. Integrated 
services cover emergency and trauma care, 
management of Communicable and Non-
Communicable Diseases, Maternal, Neonatal 
and Child Health (MNCH), MHPSS 
and clinical rehabilitation. The disease 
surveillance component will strengthen 

PEOPLE TARGETED

388K

REQUIREMENTS (US$)

43.5M

# OF PARTNERS

9

HEALTH OBJECTIVE 1:

1Improve access of vulnerable 
people to integrated primary and 
secondary health services. 

RELATES TO SO1 

HEALTH OBJECTIVE 2

2Strengthen disease surveillance 
and rapid response system

RELATES TO SO1 

HEALTH OBJECTIVE 3

3Strengthen capacity of health 
facilities for timely provision of a 
full package of health services.

RELATES TO SO1 

BREAKDOWN OF PEOPLE IN NEED AND TARGETED BY STATUS, SEX AND AGE

CONTACT

Dr Hussein Hassan 

Health Sector 
Coodinator

hassenh@who.int

31%
34%
RefugeesMigrantsIDPsReturneesNon displacedTotal%
female% children *
BY STATUSBY SEX & AGE*Children (<18 years old), adult (18-65 years), elderly (>65 
years)
%
adult*
%
elderly*
26%
26%
72%
72%
2%
2%
$43.5M54K 250K 56K 122K 72K 554K38K 175K 39K 86K 51K 388K$18.3MPEOPLE IN NEED 
PEOPLE TARGETEDFINANCIAL 
REQUIREMENTS$25.2M

the existing Early Warning Alert and Response Network 
(EWARN) and Rapid Response Network (RRN) under the 
coordination of the Emergency Operations Centre (EOC). 
This will enable partners to detect, manage and contain cases 
at the earliest stages. On capacity strengthening of the health 
workforce, health partners will rely on Emergency Medical 
Teams (EMT) and mobile teams in areas where medical 
staff is limited or specialized services are inadequate. EMT 
will complement the public system capacity and enhance 
availability and quality of services, and transfer skills to the 
existing health workforce. 

Integrated response approaches

The Health Sector will identify programmatic synergies with 
the WASH and Protection sectors and enhance inter-sectoral 
approaches during the response. Programmatic synergies 
between the WASH and Health sectors include but are not 
limited to the improvement of sanitation systems in health 
facilities, ensuring the availability of clean and safe water in 
targeted medical centres, the integration of hygiene promotion 
activities into health education sessions, distribution of 
water purifying Aquatabs through medical teams and health 
awareness activities, and working closely in the prevention 
and treatment of water-borne diseases. 

The Health Sector will work with the Protection Sector on 
response approaches that ensure community engagement, 
accountability to beneficiaries and equal access to health 
services for men, women, boys and girls. The Health and 
Protection Sectors will deliver comprehensive services on 
mental health and psychosocial support in addition to clinical 
management of sexual violence at clinical and community 
levels. Inter-sectoral coordination and communication, joint 
response planning, monitoring, as well as gap analyses will be 
undertaken at all stages of the Health Sector response. 

The Humanitarian-Development-Peace Nexus

The Health Sector will support close coordination between 
humanitarian, development and stabilization programmes to 
work jointly on data collection, data analysis and restoration 
of full access to comprehensive healthcare services. While 
responding to the acute needs of vulnerable groups, public 
health emergency projects will expand the coverage and 
quality of comprehensive healthcare service packages at 
different levels with the use of an integrated approach. Skills 
transfer through capacity development and refresher training 
will be ensured to further empower the health workforce 
and reduce reliance on mobile teams. The Health Sector will 
work closely with the different departments of the Ministry 
of Health to support the restoration of the functionality of 
the health system. This will involve rolling-out the minimum 
health service package in all districts and municipalities 
and transitioning to the Essential Health Service Package. 
Capacity building for the health workforce, and improving 
management of existing human resources, enhancing the 
health information system with the use of District Health 
Information System tool, and improving the supply chain 
system and cold chain system will be prioritized in order 
to bridge the humanitarian and development nexus in 
the context of health. The Health Sector will advocate for 
the development of district development plans that cover 
healthcare services along with other development priorities. 

Key principles of the response: centrality of 
protection, gender and accountability to affected 
population

The Health Sector will identify protection risks and needs 
during health needs assessments and health population 
surveys with the use of systematic and meaningful 
engagement tools. This includes joint community planning 
and monitoring tools. Other community conversation 
tools that focus on community health vulnerabilities and 
protection concerns will also be developed and piloted 
in some districts and municipalities. Vulnerabilities and 
strengths of men, women, girls and boys, elderly persons, 
persons with disabilities, persons belonging to minority 
groups, and persons with mental disorders will be identified 
through participatory assessments. The Health Sector will 
use a two-way communication with affected communities in 
order to capture their risks, needs, capacities and aspirations. 
In order to ensure excellence and equality in healthcare 
services, Health Sector partners will enhance the diversity 
and distribution of healthcare workforce (including available 
female staff) in all primary and secondary facilities as well as 
mobile team members. Community outreach teams will be 
reinforced and strengthened in order to expand the services to 
different community settings. Further initiatives to tackle the 
health professional-patient encounter will be discussed.

Response modalities

Direct implementation and partnership with national and 
local partners will be the main response modalities. Partners 
will deploy EMTs and mobile teams in areas with limited 
capacities of health service providers or where health service 
is not adequate. Capacity building through provision of 
regular training courses, supportive supervisions, and on-job 
training activities will represent other key response modalities. 
Partners will work with the Medical Supply Organization 
(MSO) and the Pharmaceutical department for the 
procurement and distribution of essential medical equipment, 
medicines and laboratory supplies and reagents. The Health 
Sector will also support linkages across early warning, rapid 
response and emergency response coordination. 



FOOD SECURITY

PEOPLE IN NEED

298K

Priority Needs 

Food security is a priority for the most 
vulnerable populations in Libya, as conflict 
continues to cause displacement, and the 
economic crisis contributes to increasing 
food prices. In Alkufra, Zwara and Murzuq, 
more than 30 percent of households have a 
poor or borderline food consumption. On 
average, Libyan households spend 53 per cent 
out of their total expenditure on food items.

Food needs are severe in Sirt and Zwara 
(in the West), and critical in some of the 
southern and eastern mantikas, such as 
Aljufra, Alkufra, Murzuq, Sebha, and Ubari, 
where food insecurity is high and people 
are increasingly reliant on negative coping 
strategies.

While the agricultural sector, namely crop 
or livestock production and fishing, stands 
at 22 per cent, it is particularly prominent 
in specific mantikas, such as Wadi Ashshati 
and Sebha, where 50 per cent or more of 
the population is engaged in some form of 
agricultural production. The vast majority 
of households are involved in agricultural 
production for household consumption, 
and less than 10 percent rely on agriculture 
exclusively as a source of income. Nationally, 
7.4 per cent of households have abandoned 
agricultural production across Libya since 
2014, and a majority of households still 
engaged in agricultural production report 
difficulties continuing it, as a result of the 
conflict.

Response Strategy 

Scope of the sector response

In line with the HRP scope and targeting 
parameters, the Food Security Sector aims 
to progressively strengthen and expand 
its footprint across Libya including to the 
mantikas with moderate and acceptable 
food security levels, as the increasing use of 
negative coping strategies are expected to 
have direct impact on the food security.

People targeted by food assistance have 
been identified based on geographic 
and household targeting criteria, using 
proxy indicators. Vulnerable Libyans 
have been jointly identified with the local 
crisis committees in consultation with 
partners, including NGOs. People targeted 
include IDPs, returnees, non-displaced 
hosting communities including farming 
communities, refugees and migrants with a 
priority to female-headed households, the 
elderly and households with persons living 
with disabilities. Refugees and migrants will 
also indirectly benefit from food assistance 
provided to Libyans, as it is expected to help 
local markets stabilize, and as a result, to 
contribute maintaining the prices of basic 
food items at an accessible level for non-
direct beneficiaries in the same areas. 

Following a country-specific agreement 
between WFP and UNHCR and in line with 
the UNHCR-WFP global Memorandum of 
Understanding, the Sector targets refugees 

PEOPLE TARGETED

197K

REQUIREMENTS (US$)

24.4M

# OF PARTNERS

3

FOOD SECURITY OBJECTIVE 1:

1Crisis-affected vulnerable 
populations in Libya have access 
to sufficient and nutritious food.

RELATES TO SO1 , SO2 

FOOD SECURITY OBJECTIVE 2

2Improve households food 
security for at-risk groups by 
supporting agricultural, livestock 
and fishery systems, assets and control 
of outbreak of diseases.

RELATES TO SO1 

BREAKDOWN OF PEOPLE IN NEED AND TARGETED BY STATUS, SEX AND AGE

CONTACT

Shaker Allozi
Food Security Sector 
Coordinator
shaker.allozi@wfp.org

Mohamed Alansi
Food Security Sector 
Co-coordinator
mohamed.alansi@
fao.org

23K 94K 33K 41K 107K 298K12K 27K 33K 18K 107K 197K35%
46%
RefugeesMigrantsIDPsReturneesNon displacedTotal%
female% children *
BY STATUSBY SEX & AGE*Children (<18 years old), adult (18-65 years), elderly (>65 
years)$24.4M%
adult*
%
elderly*
30%
36%
67%
60%
3%
4%
$3.86MPEOPLE IN NEED 
PEOPLE TARGETEDFINANCIAL 
REQUIREMENTS$20.58M

registered by UNHCR. The Sector also assists refugees and 
migrants in Detention Centres (DCs), through IOM, with 
emergency meals/nutritional packages. 

Response priorities

Based on the sectoral needs severity and identified vulnerable 
groups in the HNO, the Sector prioritizes response 
interventions targeting the most vulnerable communities, 
as well as the mantikas identified as having critical or severe 
needs (Alkufra, Aljufra, Azzawya, Murzuq, Sebha and Wadi 
Ashati). 

Emergency food assistance for refugees and migrants in 
dentention centres is also prioritized as an emergency 
life-saving measure undertaken during the first five days 
of migrants’ arrival at the centres, until the DCIM starts its 
assistance. It is critical that emergency food assistance in 
detention centres is a stop-gap measure and does not sustain 
the perpetuation of inhumane living conditions in detention 
centres. 

In addition to direct food assistance, the Sector supports 
agricultural, livestock and fishery systems, by providing 
emergency agricultural inputs as well as vocational trainings 
through FAO, in order to minimize the rate of abandoning 
agricultural activities, capacitate Libyan populations to 
produce their own food and sell the surplus to generate some 
income.

A rapid food security review will be conducted in 2019 to 
collect updated information on food security needs in order to 
further inform and guide response operations. 

Integrated response approaches

Integrated response approaches are planned by the sector 
during 2019. For example, FAO and WFP target the same 
population groups in identified geographical areas with 
food assistance, emergency agriculture, livestock and fishery 
support to meet their immediate food needs, while protecting 
and preserving the agricultural and livestock assets that they 
depend on.

The Sector also collaborates closely with the Education and 
Health sectors through joint activities, such as upcoming 
school feeding programmes and nutrition surveys. For 
instance, in 2019, the Sector plans to undertake a nutrition 
survey with UNICEF and the Libyan Ministry of Health 
to collect evidence to inform tailored food assistance 
programmes for pregnant and lactating women, as well as 
malnourished children. The Sector also will also collaborate 
with the Education Sector on different initiatives, such as 
Home-grown School Gardens (vegetable growing for school 
feeding) and rapid food responses with ready-to-use food, 
such as date bars already stored at predetermined schools for 
emergency cases.

The Food Security Sector continues working closely with 
the Cash Working Group (CWG) on market monitoring, 
the minimum expenditure basket, and household profiling. 
In addition, it will engage with the CWG on facilitating 
harmonized and coherent inter-sectoral approaches to 
multi-purpose cash assistance, including the definition of 
vulnerability criteria for targeting people in need. 

The Humanitarian-Development-Peace Nexus

Linking short-term humanitarian interventions, such as 
immediate food assistance to the most vulnerable groups, 
with longer-term development support, such as creation of 
livelihood opportunities and income -generating initiatives 
is critical for the Sector. All activities implemented by the 
Sector integrate nutrition-sensitive programming, gender-
transformative approaches and conflict-sensitive design. 

WFP’s port assessments planned outside the HRP will 
eventually support the rehabilitation of ports. This is expected 
not only to facilitate the import of humanitarian food and 
non-food items, but also to create an enabling environment 
for the commercial sector. Outside the HRP, and in close 
collaboration with the Libya Food and Drug Control Centre 
(FDCC), WFP provides support to improve food control 
standards, and food safety procedures. These activities are 
expected to have a positive impact on the quality of food in 
Libya.

The Food Security Sector will complement, and contribute 
to these interventions by strengthening focus on prevention/
deterioration of food insecurity and enhancing linkages 
between the sector assistance and national safety nets (to be 
reviewed next year). The Sector also plans to invest in data 
collection and analysis. 

Key principles of the response: centrality of 
protection, gender and accountability to affected 
population

Protection concerns are integrated into all activities to ensure 
that people most in need, including persons with disabilities, 
can access assistance in a safe, dignified and equitable 
manner. To address the specific needs of different population 
groups, the Sector targets women-headed households, or 
large households with pregnant and lactating women or girls, 
children under two, and/or elderly persons, people with 
chronic illnesses or people living with disabilities. 

The Sector is committed to ensuring that affected populations 
are knowledgeable about planned assistance through local 
partners and other appropriate communications mechanisms, 
such as crisis committees and regular communication 
campaigns. Specific efforts are made to consult with female 
beneficiaries in planning and implementing phases to 
ensure protection and other concerns are considered and 
addressed. For instance, the Sector will continue to offer and 
manage several platforms, such as hotlines, Post-Distribution 
Monitoring, and monthly quality control calls, through which 
people can provide their feedback on assistance received. 



Response modalities 

Response modalities will be determined based on gender 
analyses and beneficiary preferences, as well as contextual and 
sectoral (market and financial sector) assessments. Cash-
based transfers (CBT) will gradually be increased where local 
markets are functional and food is available. Wholesaler 
capacities, redemption solution technology, and local food 
supply are other factors that will be taken into consideration. 
CBT will also facilitate livelihoods and resilience-building 
activities, and partially contributes to increase access to 
essential goods and partially address liquidity crisis. 

The sector will continue to collaborate with the Joint Market 
Monitoring Initiative (JMMI) to collect data on price 
fluctuation, including the minimum expenditure basket, and 
the functionality of markets.



WATER, SANITATION & 


HYGIENE (WASH)

PEOPLE IN NEED

267K

Priority Needs 

The protracted conflict and continuous 
political instability resulted in reduced 
access to adequate WASH services as well 
as weakened capacity of WASH institutions. 
WASH priority needs are: 1) access to 
WASH services in detention centres. As a 
result of continuous overcrowding, there is a 
continued need to improve water, sanitation 
and hygiene situation in all the centres; 2) 
the need for supplies and equipment (e.g. 
generators, pumps) to maintain WASH 
facilities and ensure basic functionality of 
WASH systems in several conflict-affected 
municipalities, including Sabha, Sirt, 
Benghazi, Derna. The lack of capacity and of 
service providers particularly for the Man-
Made River Project network, (which serves 
60% of people in Libya) is acute and needs 
rehabilitation and maintenance; 3) the need 
for access to WASH in schools, particularly 
in the most marginalized areas in southern 
and western cities, conflict-affected areas of 
the country as well as areas located on the 
migration routes. The WASH situation in 
the health facilities is also in dire need of 
rehabilitation/upkeep especially regarding 
access to clean water/sanitation; 4) the need 
to access basic and safe humanitarian WASH 
services for host communities in collective 
centres and IDP camps, as well as for refugees 
and migrants wherever the needs arise as the 
protracted situation continues.

Response Strategy

Scope of the sector response 

267, 000 people including 106,000 children 
in Libya are in need of humanitarian WASH 
assistance. In line with the HRP scope and 
targeting parameters, the WASH Sector will 
target 150,000, including 60,000 children 
in highly affected mantikas (including 
Benghazi, Al Gabal Al Gharbi, Zwara, Sebha, 
Azawya, and Ejdabia). New and emerging 
conflict affected population across the 
country will be targeted for life-saving WASH 
intervention, as needs arise. The WASH 
Sector response will focus its assistance on 
the newly displaced population, IDPs living 
in collective centres, returnees with damaged 
infrastructure, overburdened non-displaced 
population in conflict-affected areas, refugees 
and migrants, and schoolchildren with 
limited access to WASH facilities. 

Response Priorities

Sectoral priorities for the WASH sector are: 

• Improvement of WASH facilities in 
detention centres to enhance dignified 
access to refugees and migrants in need. 
• Responding to the urgent WASH needs 
during onset of emergencies (e.g. water 
trucking). 
• Providing technical support to service 


PEOPLE TARGETED

150K

REQUIREMENTS (US$)

9.5M

# OF PARTNERS

7

WASH OBJECTIVE 1:

1Provide life-saving WASH 
assistance to the most vulnerable 
population groups affected by 
humanitarian crisis. 

RELATES TO SO1 

WASH OBJECTIVE 2

2Ensure the most vulnerable 
children affected by crisis have 
access to basic and safe WASH 
facilities 

RELATES TO SO1 

BREAKDOWN OF PEOPLE IN NEED AND TARGETED BY STATUS, SEX AND AGE

CONTACT

Mohammad 
Almjadleh,
WASH coordinator.
malmjadleh@unicef.
orgl

39%
43%
RefugeesMigrantsIDPsReturneesNon displacedTotal%
female% children *
BY STATUSBY SEX & AGE*Children (<18 years old), adult (18-65 years), elderly (>65 
years)
%
adult*
%
elderly*
34%
34%
63%
63%
3%
3%
$9.5M14K 56K 43K 85K 69K 267K 
8K 32K 24K 48K 39K 150K$5.3MPEOPLE IN NEED 
PEOPLE TARGETEDFINANCIAL 
REQUIREMENTS$4.2M

providers to enable them to assist their communities to 
access safe drinking water. Light rehabilitation of WASH 
facilities in IDP camps, schools, health facilities and 
detention centres.
• Ensuring children affected by the crisis have access to 
basic and safe WASH facilities in schools and health 
facilities.
• Advocating for the repair and maintenance of the Man-
Made River Project, the water network providing water 
supplies to about 60 per cent of the population in Libya.


Response interventions will be prioritized against fund 
availability, needs and engagement of vulnerable people 
particularly children and women. 

Integrated response approaches

Aiming at cost reduction and higher impact, the 
implementation will ensure proper coordination with other 
sectors. WASH in schools will be undertaken in collaboration 
with the Education Sector. WASH in health facilities will 
be implemented in collaboration with the Health Sector. 
Similarly WASH in detention centres will be carried out in 
collaboration with Protection, Food Security and Shelter/
NFI sectors. WASH in areas of return, will be delivered in 
collaboration with SNFI.

The Humanitarian-Development-Peace Nexus 

WASH activities will be complementary to social services 
provided under the UN Strategic Framework (UNSF) 2019-
2020 outcome area three on improving the capacity of Libyan 
institutions to design, develop and implement social policies 
for quality social services. The selected projects will be 
coordinated with community and local authorities through 
the existing coordination mechanisms, such as the Joint 
Technical Coordination Committee (JTCC). 

Development interventions implemented outside the HRP 
but complimentary to WASH humanitarian assistance and 
addressing some of the underlying causes of WASH needs 
will focus on building the capacity of partners for the effective 
management of WASH facilities. Other development activities 
include the repair of municipal water and sanitation systems, 
water quality monitoring and provision of supplies for affected 
municipalities in alignment with government priorities. These 
are 1) ensure service delivery and operational water and 
sanitation systems; 2) ensure continuous provision of water 
and sanitation services to affected people; and 3) reform and 
strengthen the water and sanitation sector governance, policy 
and strategy. 

Key principles of the response: centrality of 
protection, gender and accountability to affected 
population: 

WASH partners regularly involve affected communities in 
all phases of project planning, design, implementation and 
monitoring. For example, during the implementation of the 
WASH projects feedback mechanisms, such as interviews 
and surveys, are used to enable people to provide their 
comments and advice on issues, such as access to water and 
sanitation services, quality and effectiveness of the response. 
Transparent and relevant information on the organization 
and the implementation of activities are being shared with 
communities and affected people. 

Protection and gender mainstreaming are at the core of the 
humanitarian WASH assistance. The light rehabilitation 
of water and sanitation facilities in schools and health 
facilities will be adapted to ensure safe and dignified access 
for all affected population groups, especially persons with 
disabilities.

The WASH Sector has integrated information about GBV risk 
reduction including referral pathways for GBV survivors in all 
its awareness campaigns. By promoting and ensuring separate 
WASH facilities for men and women in IDP collective centres, 
schools, and detention centres, WASH partners aim to protect 
women and girls and respond to their specific needs. WASH 
need assessments and reports will also include gender and age 
disaggregated information.

Response modalities 

The WASH Sector will respond by pre-positioning basic 
WASH items at strategic locations, providing in-kind WASH 
items as well as cash assistance, whenever feasible. WASH 
partners will also re-establish the basic functionality of WASH 
facilities and adopt of key emergency preparedness measures. 
The WASH Sector is also part of the Rapid Response 
Mechanism (RRM) led by UNICEF to respond within 
three to seven days to new emergencies as they arise. This 
assistance will include provision of essential WASH items and 
emergency assistance in line with globally agreed minimum 
standards (e.g. 15 to 20 litres of water per person per day, and 
sanitation facilities of 1 latrine per 20 persons).



SHELTER & NFI

PEOPLE IN NEED

292K

Priority Needs 

Waves of conflict have caused population 
displacement and severe damages to housing 
and infrastructures across Libya, mostly 
in the coastal areas, impacting the living 
conditions of the affected populations, 
Libyans and non-Libyans. This destruction 
of housing and lack of adequate shelter 
options have led to housing shortages and 
an increase in rental prices, affecting the 
most vulnerable population.

The need for housing continues to stretch, 
especially into urban areas and around the 
major cities, exacerbating the difficulties 
in securing affordable housing and putting 
an increased number of families at risk 
of eviction. IDPs in informal settings are 
among the most vulnerable in need of 
shelter and basic infrastructure support.

On top of this housing situation, the 
current economic decline continues to 
impact the livelihoods opportunities 
of Libyans and non-Libyans. Displaced 
populations encounter greater difficulties 
to afford rental costs and cannot afford the 
costs of repairs constraining them from 
returning to their original homes.

Also Housing, Land and Property (HLP) 
rights for shelter appear to be of concern, 
especially for populations engaging in 
return. This population needs assistance 
in the form of information, counselling 
and legal assistance to access their original 
homes in a safe and dignified manner.

Response Strategy
Scope of the sector response

An estimated 292,000 people in Libya are 
in need of shelter assistance in the form of 
in-kind, cash-based and legal assistance 
related to the right for shelter.

Across Libya, the most severe needs for 
shelter assistance are concentrated in areas 
where returnees experience difficulties 
to afford safe and dignified settings, such 
as Benghazi and Sirt (72,400 people 
estimated in need); 24,800 IDPs remain 
in need of assistance in Aljfara, Benghazi, 
Sebha and Tripoli – and an estimated 
22,000 non-displaced persons would need 
support to afford a safe and dignified 
setting. Dedicated shelter assistance, 
in all forms will be prioritized in these 
areas concentrating the most vulnerable 
populations.

In line with the HRP scope and targeting 
parameters, 125,000 Libyans will be 
targeted in these prioritized areas for 
shelter activities in 2019. Migrants, 
refugees and asylum seekers, require 
particular attention, especially in areas 
such as Almargeb, Ejdabia, Murzuq, 
Sebha, Tripoli – 62,700 people need a 
specific humanitarian response in urban 
areas. These areas will be of concern for 
shelter assistance toward migrants and 
refugees. Overall, across Libya, around 
70,000 migrants and refugees will receive 
assistance in the form of NFI packages 
mostly, including in detention centres.

PEOPLE TARGETED

195K

REQUIREMENTS (US$)

18.3M

# OF PARTNERS

4

SHELTER & NFI OBJECTIVE 1:

1Provide emergency shelter 
assistance to the most vulnerable 
populations 

RELATES TO SO1 , SO2

SHELTER & NFI OBJECTIVE 2

2Provide shelter assistance to 
most vulnerable IDPs, returnees, 
non-displaced, migrants and 
refugees.

RELATES TO SO1 , SO2

BREAKDOWN OF PEOPLE IN NEED AND TARGETED BY STATUS, SEX AND AGE

CONTACT

Julien Peschmann
Shelter/NFI Sector 
Coordinator
Email: coord.libya@
sheltercluster.org

23K 102K 48K 97K 22K 292K20K 50K 36K 73K 16K 195K34%
36%
RefugeesMigrantsIDPsReturneesNon displacedTotal%
female% children *
BY STATUSBY SEX & AGE*Children (<18 years old), adult (18-65 years), elderly (>65 
years)
%
adult*
%
elderly*
29%
31%
64%
62%
7%
7%
$18.3M$9.7MPEOPLE IN NEED 
PEOPLE TARGETEDFINANCIAL 
REQUIREMENTS$8.6M

 Response priorities

In order to prevent further deterioration of the shelter 
situation of the most vulnerable populations of concern, the 
Sector’s response will focus on the following priorities:

Provide emergency shelter assistance to the most vulnerable 
populations (to meet the basic needs of the most vulnerable 
population affected by new and onset crises across Libya);

• Provide shelter assistance to most vulnerable IDPs, 
returnees, non-displaced, migrants and refugees, even the 
population burdening long-term displacement; 
• Empower the most vulnerable population groups in the 
realization of their HLP rights for shelter.


The Sector aims to provide tailored assistance in-kind, but also 
in the form of emergency cash grants wherever feasible and 
appropriate, to ensure people meet their needs in a manner 
that allows choice and promotes their dignity. 

Integrated response approaches

A cross-sectoral approach will be developed in order to 
ensure that protection considerations are mainstreamed and 
incorporated at all stages of interventions.

A combination of in-kind and cash-based assistance 
is provided to people that have been assessed as socio-
economically vulnerable through a close linkage with actors 
providing multi-purpose cash to ensure that scarce resources 
are directed to those most in need.

Shelter upgrades will be undertaken through an integrated 
approach, involving multiple sectors, such as WASH, while 
engaging in repairs, rehabilitation of individual dwellings, 
and basic infrastructure improvements allowing the access to 
dignified shelter solutions. The strategy addresses the physical 
aspects of poor living-conditions, but is not limited to the 
physical ones.

The Shelter and NFI Sector, in collaboration with the 
Protection sector will develop due diligence standards for 
the security of tenure. Information, legal assistance related 
to HLP issues will be subject to a dedicated HLP Area of 
Responsibility, reporting to both the Protection and Shelter 
and NFI sectors, which will also contribute to social cohesion 
efforts in most affected areas.

The Humanitarian-Development-Peace Nexus

The Shelter and NFI Sector aims to deliver immediate 
humanitarian assistance and build the foundations of longer-
term development and contribute to stabilization initiatives. 
Responding to the Libyan protracted crisis requires the use 
of different types of interventions that build resilience, while 
addressing urgent needs through a mix of short- and long-
term actions.

Combining mechanisms such as in-kind assistance (NFIs and/ 
or shelter materials), with cash-based assistance at household 
level (emergency grant, rental subsidies, cash for construction 
materials), builds resilience and results in longer-term 
solutions.

With expanded livelihood opportunities, affected households 
will be better able to contribute to local economies and move 
towards self-sufficiency.

The objective of developing the due diligence guidelines, 
and standards in collaboration with Protection actors is to 
support shelter actors in ensuring that HLP rights of both 
shelter beneficiaries and land/property owners in Libya are 
protected to the greatest extent possible throughout the 
shelter programme cycle. A due diligence process also ensures 
accountability to beneficiaries and donors. 

Key principles of the response: centrality of 
protection, gender and accountability to affected 
population:

The Sector continues to move towards providing support to 
the most vulnerable population groups based on the cross-
sectoral vulnerability analysis of households. The Shelter and 
NFI Sector is committed to incorporating gender and age 
considerations across the response and to ensure that the 
humanitarian response targets the most vulnerable, enhance 
safety, dignity, and promote and protect the human rights of 
the beneficiaries.

Mainstreaming protection in shelter-related intervention will 
consider the following aspects and principles:

Prioritize safety and dignity, and avoid doing harm

• It is essential to understand land tenure arrangements, 
including statutory/legislative and customary access 
rights to land, water and other natural resources. This will 
reduce the risk of eviction or conflict erupting due to the 
lack of clarity of these issues.;
• Avoid any shelter or settlement activities that involve 
forced relocation or return.


Meaningful Access

• Ensure particularly vulnerable groups, such as female 
headed households, older persons and persons with 
disability have equal access to shelter assistance – develop 
appropriate response to help vulnerable groups;
• Treat owners, tenants, the landless, informal dwellers 
and secondary occupants equitably even if return, 
resettlement and reintegration options are different for 
different groups.


Accountability, Participation and Empowerment

• Consider assistance to host families and host 
communities, such as support in expanding or adapting 
the host family shelter;
• Set up mechanisms for complaints and appeals, and 
ensure that men and women are both comfortable to 
access these complaints mechanisms.




Response modalities

In-kind assistance will be delivered in the form of family NFI 
packages during emergency responses and also for long-term 
displaced populations in need of support. Also cash for shelter 
in emergency situations will be developed wherever feasible 
and appropriate.

Shelter upgrade activities will be a key component of the 
in-kind response, in the form of shelter materials dedicated 
to light repairs and rehabilitation. Light infrastructure 
improvements will also be considered in specific situations 
such as in informal settlements.

Migrants and refugee populations will also receive in-kind 
assistance through tailored NFI packages according to their 
specific needs.

In addition, unconditional multi-purpose cash assistance will 
be provided when appropriate, in combination to the in-kind 
assistance to enable the most vulnerable populations to cover 
inflating rental costs and facilitate access to essential goods 
and services.



EDUCATION

PEOPLE IN NEED

93K

Priority Needs 

There are approximately 343,300 Libyan, 
migrant and refugee school-aged children (6-
17 years) whose access to education has been 
affected due to the conflict, displacement 
or legal status in the country. Out of them, 
93,000 school-aged IDP, returnee, refugee 
and migrant children are most vulnerable 
and in need of education in emergency 
support. 

Many conflict and displaced-affected children 
are suffering from psychosocial distress or 
trauma, affecting their ability to learn and 
develop to their fullest potential. Access to 
education remains one of the key priorities 
for returnees, the majority of which are 
found in Benghazi (51 per cent), Sirt (41 per 
cent), and Ubari (8 per cent), to establish a 
resumption of normalcy in children’s lives. 

Migrant and refugee children particularly 
from sub-Saharan Africa face most 
difficulties in accessing education, as they are 
prevented from enrolling due to their legal 
status and documentation. Those children 
that do attend school are often discriminated 
and face insurmountable language and 
cultural barriers. Beyond the primary level, 
most non-Libyan adolescents and youth have 
no pathway to continue their education. 

Violence in schools remains a paramount 
issue for all children and young people in 
Libya. Harassment, bullying and violence 
push children to drop out from school, 
leaving them exposed to multiple protection 
concerns, such as exploitation and risk of 
recruitment among others.

Response Strategy 

Scope of the sector response

In line with the HRP scope and targeting 
parameters, the Education Sector targets 
71,000 most vulnerable school-aged children, 
both Libyan, and migrant and refugee 
children, especially those living in hard-to-
reach and conflict-affected areas. 

The response targets 26,162 Libyan children 
from grades 1-12 and at least 600 teachers 
in the West (Tripoli, Sirt, Zwara, Azzawiya 
and Misrata mantikas), the East (Benghazi 
and Derna) and the South (Sabha, Ubari and 
Murzuq mantikas). 

For migrant and refugee children, the 
response targets 45,000 school-aged children 
and at least 300 teachers in areas where large 
refugee and migrant populations reside, 
particularly in the West (Tripoli, Almagreb, 
Azzawiya, Misrata and Al Jabal Al Gharbi), 
the East (Benghazi, AlKufra and Ejdabia) and 
the South (Sebha, Murzuq and Ubari). 

Response priorities

Education partners continue to support 
both national systems and community-
based structures to facilitate access to quality 
education for all vulnerable girls and boys, 

PEOPLE TARGETED

71K

REQUIREMENTS (US$)

12.2M

# OF PARTNERS

8

EDUCATION OBJECTIVE 1:

1Scale up equitable access to 
formal and non formal education 
for vulnerable school-aged 
children affected by protracted crisis 

RELATES TO SO2 

EDUCATION OBJECTIVE 2

2Improve the quality of education 
services in protective learning 
environments

RELATES TO SO2 

EDUCATION OBJECTIVE 3

3Strengthen the capacity of the 
education sector to deliver 
a timely, coordinated and 
evidence-based education response

RELATES TO SO2 

BREAKDOWN OF PEOPLE IN NEED AND TARGETED BY STATUS, SEX AND AGE

CONTACT

Hind Omer 
Education Sector 
Coordinator
Email:homer@unicef.
org

Hollyn Romeyn 
Education Sector Co-
coordinator
Email:hollyn.
romeyn@nrc.no

39%
42%
RefugeesMigrantsIDPsReturneesNon displacedTotal%
female% children *
BY STATUSBY SEX & AGE*Children (<18 years old), adult (18-65 years), elderly (>65 
years)
%
adult*
%
elderly*
100% 
100%
0%
0%
0%
0%
$12.2M24K 29K 10K 11K 20K 93K21K 24K 8K 8K 10K 71K$4.1MPEOPLE IN NEED 
PEOPLE TARGETEDFINANCIAL 
REQUIREMENTS$8.1M

irrespective of their legal status in the country. The response 
prioritizes vulnerable children including children living with 
disabilities, especially in hard-to-reach and conflict-affected 
areas. 

The Sector prioritizes improved access to formal education 
for children through support to teacher training, provision 
of supplies, and light and small scale rehabilitation of schools 
with gender-sensitive WASH facilities. Children who have 
been identified as at risk of dropping out of school or who 
are not attending due to displacement or legal barriers 
will be supported with non-formal education services, 
such as catch up classes and remedial support, to ensure 
that they do not miss out on additional years of education. 
Education partners have also prioritized life skills education 
to equip children with the skills needed for better learning 
in order to reach their full potential. Attention is also given 
to psychosocial support and recreational interventions 
for vulnerable children, while also addressing violence in 
schools through training of teachers in child protection and 
improved teaching methods. 

The Education Sector continues to improve the capacity 
of education actors, by undertaking capacity development 
programmes for Education in Emergency (EiE) actors 
mainly at the national level. This support aims to strengthen 
their knowledge and skills to plan, implement and 
coordinate high quality EiE preparedness and responses in 
protracted emergencies and crises.

Integrated response approaches 

Education is crucial to provide access to life-saving 
information, address psychosocial needs, and create a stable 
and safe environment for the most vulnerable boys and 
girls and foster social cohesion, working closely with the CP 
and GBV working groups, through referrals to specialized 
agencies for case management or other specialized services. 
Furthermore, the education sector provides psychosocial 
support to boys and girls, enhances teaching methodologies 
to improve the learning environment for children, and 
collaborates with community centres where vulnerable 
children, from host communities and refugee and migrant 
children, can access services such as protection and non-
formal education services, among others. 

The Education Sector continues to work with the WASH 
Sector to undertake light rehabilitation of public and 
community schools with gender-sensitive basic WASH 
facilities (including for refugees and migrants). Education 
partners also collaborates very closely with the Food Security 
Sector on school feeding programmes for approximately 
20,000 children. 

The Humanitarian-Development-Peace Nexus 

Despite the continued complexity of the Libyan context, and 
the lack of availability of reliable data for planning and policy 
recommendations, education reform remains a priority on 
the national agenda. Education partners continue to support 
strengthening both national systems and community-
based structures to facilitate access to quality education 
for all vulnerable girls and boys, irrespective of their legal 
status in the country to respond to the education needs of 
children where the system cannot, as part of its humanitarian 
development nexus approach.

By focusing on the three objectives of access, quality and 
education system strengthening, the sector contributes 
to the Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 4 (Ensure 
inclusive and equitable quality education and promote 
lifelong learning opportunities for all) and to the overall 
education reform of the system. Long-term system 
strengthening assistance, including the establishment of 
the Education Management Information System (EMIS), 
will further support evidence-based interventions. 
Assistance is coordinated with communities and/or local 
authorities. Capacity building for both teachers and local 
actors is expected to enhance sustainability and ownership 
of interventions. Teacher training also contributes to 
the Ministry of Education’s vision of capacity building 
for teachers that will enhance the quality of education 
for children. In order to enhance the linkages between 
immediate needs and longer term investments, the 
Education Sector continues to advocate for the inclusion of 
under-served locations and most vulnerable populations, 
identifying pathways with the Ministry of Education to enrol 
non-Libyans in schools. 

Key principles of the response: centrality of 
protection, gender and accountability to affected 
population

The protracted crisis continues to impact access to quality 
education for both Libyan IDPs and returnees, and also for 
migrant and refugee school-age children. The design and 
provision of education services considers the different needs 
of girls and boys based on age, gender, and diversity. For 
example, improvements to structures will aim to increase 
access for children with limited mobility and teacher training 
will include modules on inclusivity and differentiation 
of instruction. Special attention is given to providing 
opportunities for the most vulnerable girls, refugee and 
migrant children to ensure their access to education services. 

AAP is addressed through coordination mechanisms with 
relevant national counterparts who have records of displaced 
school-age and out-of-school children to ensure regular 
feedback loops to enhance and strengthen interventions. 
Parent-Teacher Associations in formal schools and similar 
parent groups in non-formal education gather feedback 
and inputs from communities on the services provided by 
partners. 

The Sector works closely with child protection partners 
to ensure learning spaces are conducive and protective 
environments, taking into consideration some of the factors 
that might impact children’s access and retention in school. 



Response modalities 

Education assistance is coordinated jointly with the Ministry 
of Education, local authorities and local partners, through 
strengthened and expanded partnerships with national 
and international NGOs, civil society organizations and 
UN entities operating in conflict-affected areas. The Sector 
regularly monitors activities, including through third-party 
monitoring and partnerships, with education counterparts 
and national partners. 



COMMON SERVICES

REQUIREMENTS (US$)

16.5M

Coordination: 8.6M

Logistics: 5.8M

ET: 2.1M

Logistics, Emergency Telecommunications, Coordination

Following a HCT decision to rationalize and 
strengthen the coordination architecture, a 
common services pillar was created in the 
2019 HRP to include Logistics, Emergency 
Telecommunication (ET), UNHAS and 
Coordination. The Logistics and the ET 
sectors were activated in October 2018 
to help humanitarian actors re-establish 
operational presence in the main locations 
across Libya. All common services will 
benefit the entire humanitarian community, 
by enabling it to effectively and timely reach 
the people most in need.

Priority Needs 

Operating in Libya continues to remain 
challenging, with numerous security, 
logistical and administrative constraints to 
effectively deliver humanitarian assistance to 
the most vulnerable population. 

Access to consolidated information related 
to logistics capacities and infrastructure, 
and reliable logistics services are priority 
needs to support a coordinated response 
and supply chain functions of humanitarian 
organizations. The volatile security situation 
inside Libya also hinders the ability of 
humanitarian actors to reach people in need, 
as travelling by road is often not possible. 

Reliable security communications and 
internet connectivity in at least one 
common operational hub, starting with 
Benghazi, is critical, as highlighted by 
an ICT assessment mission and a needs 
assessment survey conducted in May 2018. 
Findings also showed the need to enhance 
current Information Communication 
and Technology (ICT) services in Tripoli 
for humanitarian organizations currently 
operating or planning to work in Libya.

With limited sector coordination capacity, 
reduced operational presence in the country, 
particularly outside Tripoli, and a small 
number of national and local partners, 
humanitarian coordination in Libya 
remains challenging. Simple and effective 
coordination mechanisms, a strong and 
unified voice on humanitarian issues, and a 
robust humanitarian narrative that underpins 
collective advocacy and the humanitarian 
strategy are priority needs. Collaboration 
with national actors and the centrality 
of protection across all humanitarian 
interventions are other critical areas of 
concerns to the humanitarian community.

Response Strategy 

Response priorities

The Logistics Sector will focus on i) 
maintaining and strengthening logistics 
coordination and information sharing among 
all humanitarian organizations operating 
across Libya, ii) facilitating common logistics 
services provision to enhance the ability 
of the humanitarian community to deliver 
relief items where most needed, and iii) 
conducting mapping and assessments of key 
logistics infrastructure and entry points, to 
clarify processes, mitigate access constraints 
and bureaucratic impediments to cargo 
movements, and maximize use of resources 
available in country. 

The ET Sector will provide ICT, ICT 
helpdesk, internet connectivity and facilitate 
security telecommunications services along 
with information management services 
to humanitarian partners and affected 
population in Libya.

UNHAS will provide a fast, safe and flexible 
air service to the humanitarian community, 
facilitate the movement of humanitarian 
personnel and help expedite projects 
implementation within the country. The 
service will also transport light cargo to 
remote locations and evacuate humanitarian 
staff, should the situation require it. 

Service provision will focus on the main hubs 
of Tripoli, Misrata, Benghazi and Sebha, to 
address operational needs in the western, 
eastern, and southern parts of the country. 
Activities will be expanded to other areas, as 
needed, based on operational bottlenecks, 
humanitarian access and presence.

Coordination response priorities include i) 
increase the effectiveness of humanitarian 

# OF PARTNERS

6

LOGISTICS OBJECTIVE 1:

1Provide logistics coordination, 
information management, 
support services to organizations 
responding to the humanitarian crisis.

RELATES TO SO1 , SO2 

EMERGENCY 
TELECOMMUNICATIONS 
OBJECTIVE 2

2Coordinate the ICT response 
through the provision of shared 
connectivity and facilitation of 
security telecommunication services 
in common operational areas for 
the humanitarian community, 
collaborating with inter-sectoral 
initiatives to increase access and 
accountability to affected communities

RELATES TO SO1 , SO2 

COORDINATION OBJECTIVE 3

3Support humanitarian leadership 
and coordination to ensure 
an effective and principled 
humanitarian response 

RELATES TO SO1 , SO2 

LOGISTICS OBJECTIVE 4

4 Guarantee a safe and reliable 
air service to the humanitarian 
community 

RELATES TO SO1 , SO2 



response by building partnerships and 
enhancing leadership focussed on delivery, 
ii) rationalize the coordination architecture, 
enhance mutual accountability within the 
Humanitarian Country Team and strengthen 
information sharing, iii) strengthen area 
coordination, iv) undertake common 
advocacy on key humanitarian issues derived 
from a solid evidence base to promote respect 
for humanitarian principles, space and access, 
to ensure civilians are protected, and that the 
voices of affected people and needs inform 
the response, and to mobilize adequate 
funding for humanitarian assistance, and vi) 
enhance preparedness and rapid response 
mechanisms. At all times, humanitarian 
coordination will reinforce and promote 
inter-sectoral complementarity to enhance 
the impact of the collective response. 

The Humanitarian-Development Nexus

The mapping and assessments of local 
infrastructures will include an analysis 
on rehabilitation needs and options to 
enhance local capacities in the medium and 
long terms through training and capacity 
building initiatives, in coordination with 
stabilization and development interventions. 
The coordination and information sharing 
role will also entail close collaboration with 
national and local counterparts and advocacy 
to streamline logistics and emergency 
telecommunications procedures and improve 
efficiency of the public services system.

The coordination sector will strengthen 
efforts to bridge the gap between 
humanitarian assistance and development 
and stabilization support, through the 
identification and achievement of collective 
outcomes and the creation of platforms for 
information exchange and planning. 

Key principles of the response: 
centrality of protection, gender and 
accountability to affected population 

Acknowledging the importance of 
strengthening Accountability to Affected 
Population (AAP), and in close collaboration 
with inter-sector coordination mechanisms, 
the ET Sector will explore options to establish 
Services for Communities (S4C). This 
includes providing advice to humanitarian 
organizations and implementing technical 
solutions, such as establishing an inter-agency 
feedback mechanism to provide people with 
the opportunity to give feedback on the 
assistance received. 

Logistics Sector interventions will be based 
on a participatory approach including regular 
discussions and feedback during sector 
coordination meetings and monitoring 
capacity of the service usage. 

The Coordination Sector will support 
protection mainstreaming at the inter-
sectoral level, in close collaboration with the 
Protection Sector, through the development 
of a protection strategy. It will also facilitate 
the definition of an AAP strategy to agree 
on a collective and coherent approach to 
engaging with affected people. Coordination 
actors will also support sectors developing 
needs-based impartial responses that take 
into consideration the different needs of 
women, men, girls and boys, as well as the 
specific vulnerabilities and capacities of the 
affected people, especially with respect to 
gender and age. In addition, it also ensures 
that early recovery informs all steps of the 
humanitarian programme cycle. 

Response modalities 

Logistics services provided will include 
regular and ad-hoc coordination meetings in 
central and field locations, based on partners’ 
presence, timely information sharing through 
multiple platforms, common storage capacity 
established in different logistics hubs, as 
needed by humanitarian organizations 
primarily for contingency and emergency 
stocks, mapping and assessments of logistics 
infrastructures and processes to support 
humanitarian supply chain capacities. 

The ET Sector will provide secure internet 
connectivity and facilitate security 
telecommunications services, by enhancing 
and sharing existing resources or deploying 
ICT equipment and staff to common 
operational areas, building local capacity, and 
establishing an information-sharing platform 
(etcluster.org) to coordinate operations with 
partners and users.

Coordination actors aim to achieve their 
response priorities through i) capacity 
development of sectors and area coordination 
groups, ii) humanitarian financing, e.g. 
CERF, international appeals (HRPs and Flash 
Appeals), iii) needs assessments support to 
all humanitarian actors, and iv) enhanced 
communications, advocacy efforts and 
information management.

CONTACT

LOGISTICS:
Valentina Signori,
Logistics Sector 
coordinator
Valentina.signori@
wfp.org

ET:
Pastor Lovo,
ET Sector 
Coordinator
pastor.lovo@wfp.org

COORDINATION:
Niels Scott,
OCHA Head of 
Office,
Scott2@un.org

UNHAS:
Mattia Bugatto
mattia.bugatto@wfp.
org



MULTI-PURPOSE CASH ASSISTANCE

PEOPLE TARGETED

74K

Strategy 

The Cash Working Group (CWG), in 
coordination with the sectors, supports 
the most vulnerable households to meet 
their urgent basic needs through the 
provision of multi-purpose cash assistance 
(MPCA) in areas where markets are 
functioning, accessible, and safe delivery 
of cash is possible. MPCA can be deployed 
flexibly to respond to the basic needs of 
socioeconomically vulnerable households in 
a manner that allows choice and dignity. For 
households impacted by the ongoing conflict, 
multi-month MPCA is provided to ensure 
that the most vulnerable are able to meet 
their basic needs without relying on negative 
coping strategies. 

To achieve this, CWG partners will provide 
emergency one-off cash assistance or 
multi-month cash assistance using a range 
of delivery mechanisms, including prepaid 
cards, mobile money, and direct cash. 
Partners will regularly monitor the prices 
of goods and exchange rates, ensuring that 
transfer values are appropriate and that local 
markets are able to meet the needs of affected 
populations.

Under Objective one, partners will: 

• Conduct vulnerability assessments and 
identify highly vulnerable families who 
need support to meet their urgent basic 
needs. 
• Provide emergency one-off cash 
assistance to highly vulnerable 
households.
• Conduct post-distribution monitoring.


Under Objective two, partners will:

• Conduct vulnerability assessments and 
identify highly vulnerable families who 
need support to meet their basic needs. 
• Deliver three months of MPCA to 
highly vulnerable Libyan households 
and up to six months of MPCA to highly 
vulnerable refugee and asylum seeker 
households. 
• Conduct post-distribution monitoring.


All partners will coordinate their activities 
through the Cash Working Group, and 
ensure their approach is harmonized 
with other cash actors assisting the same 
population groups. Partners will contribute 
to the Joint Market Monitoring Initiative 
(JMMI), to ensure the transfer value remains 
appropriate and is adjusted when necessary. 
This includes regular market monitoring on 
the contents of the minimum expenditure 
basket, analysing price trends and monitoring 
exchange rate fluctuations. The contents of 
the minimum expenditure basket are agreed 
in coordination with sector leads. Refugees 
and asylum seekers may be approved for 
up to six months of cash assistance under 
objective two, based on severity of needs, 
after which they can be reassessed for further 
assistance. CWG partners will conduct a 
mapping exercise to explore possible linkages 
of MPCA with social protection platforms as 
part of a future exit strategy. 

REQUIREMENTS (US$)

23.2M

# OF PARTNERS

5

MPCA OBJECTIVE 1:

1Support vulnerable households 
to meet their urgent basic 
needs through the provision of 
emergency one-off cash assistance 

RELATES TO SO1 

MPCA OBJECTIVE 2

2Support socioeconomically 
vulnerable households to meet 
their basic needs through 
the provision of multi-month cash 
assistance

RELATES TO SO1 

CONTACT

Erick Gerstner
CWG Coordinator
Email:gerstner@
unhcr.org

Mustafa Hadeed
CWG Co-
Coordinator
Email:mhadeed@
mercycorps.org

BREAKDOWN OF PEOPLE IN NEED AND TARGETED BY STATUS, SEX AND AGE

45%
RefugeesMigrantsIDPsReturneesNon displacedTotal%
female% children *
BY STATUSBY SEX & AGE*Children (<18 years old), adult (18-65 years), elderly (>65 
years)
%
adult*
%
elderly*
34%61%5%
$23.2M11K - 45K 11K 7K 74K$5.8MPEOPLE TARGETEDFINANCIAL 
REQUIREMENTS$17.4M

Targeting 

Partners will target a total of 73,550 individuals with 
multi-purpose cash assistance in 2019, where the needs are 
identified by key sectors, including Shelter/NFI, WASH, 
Protection and Food Security. The targeted population 
includes Libyans (IDPs, returnees, and non-displaced) and 
non-Libyans (refugees and migrants). MPCA is provided 
to people that have been assessed against harmonized 
socio-economic vulnerability criteria based on a household 
assessment. These criteria will be tailored to different 
population groups. They will take into consideration different 
vulnerability aspects based on multiple proxy indicators that 
will measure the socio-economic vulnerability of households. 
The assessments will help to ensure that scarce resources 
are directed to those most in need. The targeting approach 
adopted by the CWG factors in age, gender and disability 
considerations.

Key MPCA response principles

Cash assistance under the 2019 HRP response will be planned 
and implemented so as to promote the safety, dignity and 
rights of the affected people. These efforts will be guided 
and coordinated with the Protection Sector. The CWG will 
work closely with protection partners to conduct a joint 
protection risk assessment for MPCA. The provision of 
targeted cash assistance to the most vulnerable can cause 
tension within communities if transparent communication 
and accountability mechanisms are not in place. CWG 
partners will provide clear information to communities, 
ensuring that robust two-way communication channels are in 
place. The harmonization of targeting criteria – reviewed by 
the Protection Sector – and transfer values amongst all CWG 
actors also serve to lessen tension among the communities we 
serve. 

CWG partners will ensure community involvement at every 
possible stage of the project cycle, from needs assessment to 
project evaluation. The timing, location and method of the 
cash transfers are coordinated with community members to 
ensure that all beneficiaries, including the elderly, women and 
persons with disabilities are able to collect the cash transfers. 

Appropriate community accountability and reporting 
mechanisms will be established so that affected populations 
can provide feedback on the adequacy of the intervention, 
or raise concerns and complaints. Each CWG partner 
has a feedback mechanism, including telephone hotlines, 
community Focussed Group Discussions (FGDs), and 
community feedback boxes. At least one mechanism for 
submitting complaints is available at every distribution site, 
and the programme team ensures all cash recipients and 
community members are encouraged to share comments. 
CWG partners are committed to providing assistance in 
accordance with the principles of Do No Harm. All project 
staff receive training on feedback and complaints mechanisms. 



GUIDE TO GIVING

HRP

CONTRIBUTING TO THE 
HUMANITARIAN RESPONSE PLAN

To see the country’s humanitarian 
needs overview, humanitarian response plan 
and monitoring reports, and donate directly to 
organizations participating to the plan, please visit 
:

www.humanitarian
response.info/operations/libya

DONATING THROUGH THE CENTRAL 
EMERGENCY RESPONSE FUND (CERF)

CERF provides rapid initial funding 
for life-saving actions at the onset of emergencies 
and for poorly funded, essential humanitarian 
operations in protracted crises. The OCHA-
managed CERF receives contributions from various 
donors – mainly governments, but also private 
companies, foundations, charities and individuals – 
which are combined into a single fund. This is used 
for crises anywhere in the world. Find out more 
about the CERF and how to donate by visiting the 
CERF website: 

www.unocha.org/cerf/our-
donors/how-donate

IN-KIND RELIEF AID

The United Nations urges donors to make cash rather than in-kind donations, for maximum speed and 
flexibility, and to ensure the aid materials that are most needed are the ones delivered. If you can make only 
in-kind contributions in response to disasters and emergencies, please contact:

logik@un.org

REGISTERING AND RECOGNIZING YOUR CONTRIBUTIONS

OCHA manages the Financial Tracking Service (FTS), which records all reported humanitarian contributions 
(cash, in-kind, multilateral and bilateral) to emergencies. Its purpose is to give credit and visibility 
to donors for their generosity and to show the total amount of funding and expose gaps in humanitarian 
plans. Please report yours to FTS, either by email to fts@un.org or through the online contribution report 
form at http://fts.unocha.org



monitoring ......................................................... 13Summary of needs, targets & requirements ................... 14PART II: OPERATIONAL; RESPONSE PLANSFood security ....................................................................... 16Coordination ....................................................................... 17Refugee response plan ...................................................... 18Guide to giving ................................................................... 19PART III: ANNEXESObjectives, indicators & targets 
Participating organizations & funding requirements 
Planning figures: people in need and targeted 
What if? ... we fail to respond 
PART III: ANNEXES



OBJECTIVES, INDICATORS & TARGETS

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES, INDICATORS AND TARGETS

Strategic Objective 1 (SO1): Provide and improve safe and dignified access to essential goods and critical 
public services in synergy with sustainable development assistance

INDICATOR

IN NEED

TARGET

Refugees, Migrants 
and Asylum seekers

IDPs, returnees, host, 
non-displaced

Refugees, Migrants 
and Asylum seekers

IDPs, returnees, host, 
non-displaced

TOTAL TARGET

Number of people having received 
multi-sector assistance

552,000

Percentage of community satisfied with 
assistance received

60%

Number of people having received 
multi-purpose cash assistance

74,000







Strategic Objective 2 (SO2): Enhance protection and promote adherence to International Humanitarian Law, 
International Human Rights Law, and International Refugee Law.

INDICATOR

IN NEED

TARGET

Refugees, Migrants 
and Asylum seekers

IDPs, returnees, host, 
non-displaced

Refugees, Migrants 
and Asylum seekers

IDPs, returnees, host, 
non-displaced

TOTAL TARGET

Number of people having received 
protection assistance

234,000





SECTOR OBJECTIVES, INDICATORS AND TARGETS

 PROTECTION Objective 1: Monitor and assess protection risks and violations to identify persons in need 
to inform the humanitarian response 

INDICATOR

IN NEED

TARGET

Refugees, Migrants 
and Asylum seekers

IDPs, returnees, host, 
non-displaced

Refugees, Migrants 
and Asylum seekers

IDPs, returnees, host, non-
displaced

TOTAL TARGET

# of communities reached with protection 
monitoring and/or needs assessments

TOTAL: 

All communities in 
need

TOTAL: 

All communities in 
need

TOTAL: 30

TOTAL: 250

280

% of active official detention centres 
reached with protection monitoring and/
or needs assessments

TOTAL: 100%

TOTAL: N/A

TOTAL: 100%

TOTAL: N/A

100%

# of individuals reached with protection 
monitoring and/or needs assessments

TOTAL: 339,000

Male: 214,000 

Female: 54,000

Boys: 45,000 

Girls 26,000

TOTAL: 150,000

Male: 45,500 

Female: 42,500

Boys: 34,500 

Girls 27,500

TOTAL: 40,000

Male: 25,000 

Female: 7,000

Boys: 5,000 

Girls 3,000

TOTAL: 36,000

Male: 11,000 

Female: 10,000

Boys: 8,000 

Girls 7,000

76,000





relates to SO2



 PROTECTION Objective 2: Provide specialized protection assistance and services to vulnerable and 
conflict affected Libyans and non-Libyans 

INDICATOR

IN NEED

TARGET

Refugees, Migrants 
and Asylum seekers

IDPs, returnees, host, 
non-displaced

Refugees, Migrants and 
Asylum seekers

IDPs, returnees, host, 
non-displaced

TOTAL TARGET

# of individuals receiving specialized 
services

TOTAL: 339,000

Male: 214,000

Female: 54,000

Boys: 45,000 

Girls: 26,000

TOTAL: 150,000

Male: 45,500

Female: 42,500

Boys: 34,500

Girls: 27,500

TOTAL: 45,000

Male: 24,000 

Female: 10,000

Boys: 7,000 

Girls 4,000

TOTAL: 93,000

Male: 28,000 

Female: 26,000

Boys: 21,000 

Girls 18,000

138,000

# of individuals reached by awareness 
raising activities (Communicating with 
Communities)

TOTAL: 325,000

Male: 205,000 

Female: 52,000

Boys: 43,000 

Girls 25,000

TOTAL: 115,000

Male: 35,000 

Female: 33,000

Boys: 26,000 

Girls 21,000

TOTAL: 100,000

Male: 63,000 

Female: 16,000

Boys: 13,000 

Girls: 8,000

TOTAL: 100,000

Male: 30,000 

Female: 28,000

Boys: 23,000 

Girls: 19,000

200,000

# of individuals participating in 
structured sustained psychosocial 
activities

TOTAL: 50,000

Male: 1,500 

Female: 1,500

Boys: 30,000 

Girls: 17,000

TOTAL: 90,000

Male: 9,000 

Female: 9,000

Boys: 40,000 

Girls: 32,000

TOTAL: 25,000

Male: 500 

Female: 500

Boys: 15,000 

Girls: 9,000

TOTAL: 55,000

Male: 5,000 

Female: 5,000

Boys: 25,000 

Girls: 20,000

80,000

# of referral pathways established

TOTAL: 22

TOTAL: 22

TOTAL: 6

TOTAL: 1

7

# of women and girls of reproductive 
age received dignity kits

TOTAL: 40,000

Female: 32,000

Girls: 8,000

TOTAL: 30,000

Female: 24,000

Girls: 6,000

TOTAL: 40,000

Female: 32,000

Girls: 8,000

TOTAL: 30,000

Female: 24,000

Girls: 6,000

70,000





 PROTECTION Objective 3: Engage with authorities and humanitarian partners to promote full adherence 
to international protection norms, humanitarian and human rights law and facilitate community-based 
approaches to protection

INDICATOR

IN NEED

TARGET

Refugees, Migrants 
and Asylum seekers

IDPs, returnees, host, 
non-displaced

Refugees, Migrants and 
Asylum seekers

IDPs, returnees, 
host, non-displaced

TOTAL TARGET

# of individual community 
members trained on 
protection approaches, 
norms, and humanitarian 
and human rights laws

TOTAL: N/A

TOTAL: N/A

TOTAL: 400

Male: 250 

Female: 150

TOTAL: 700

Male: 375 

Female: 325

1,100

# of individuals from service 
providers and/or institutions 
trained on protection 
approaches, norms, and 
humanitarian and human 
rights laws

TOTAL: N/A

TOTAL: N/A

TOTAL: 1,000

Male: 600 

Female: 400

TOTAL: 1,000

Male: 600 

Female: 400

2,000

# of individuals benefiting 
from social cohesion activities

TOTAL: 489,000

Male: 260,000

Female: 96,000

Boys: 80,000

Girls 53,000

TOTAL: 100,000

Male: 42,000

Female: 16,000

Boys: 25,000

Girls 17,000

100,000





relates to SO2

relates to SO2



 HEALTH Objective 1: Improve access of vulnerable people to integrated primary and secondary health 
services 

INDICATOR

IN NEED

TARGET

Refugees, Migrants and 
Asylum seekers

IDPs, returnees, host, 
non-displaced

Refugees, Migrants and 
Asylum seekers

IDPs, returnees, host, 
non-displaced

TOTAL TARGET

Number of targeted people 
receiving a minimimum 
package of health services 
through fixed or mobile 
facilities

TOTAL: 304,296

Male: 250,520

Female: 53,776

Boys: 25,295 

Girls 29,342

TOTAL: 249,408

Male: 133,600 
Female: 115,808

Boys: 57,969 

Girls 45,582

TOTAL: 213,000

Male: 175,000 

Female: 38,000

Boys: 18,000 

Girls: 21,000

TOTAL: 175,000

Male: 93,000 

Female: 82,000

Boys: 41,000 

Girls: 32,000

388,000

Number of targeted migrants 
in detentions centres 
receiving a minimimum 
package of health services 
through fixed or mobile 
facilities.

TOTAL: 7,000

Male: 87% Female: 
13%

Boys: 7% Girls: 2,2%

N/A

TOTAL: 5,000

Male: 87% Female: 13%

Boys: 7% Girls: 2,2%

N/A

5,000





 HEALTH Objective 2: Strenghen disease surveillance and rapid respone system

INDICATOR

IN NEED

TARGET

Refugees, Migrants and 
Asylum seekers

IDPs, returnees, host, 
non-displaced

Refugees, Migrants and 
Asylum seekers

IDPs, returnees, 
host, non-displaced

TOTAL TARGET

Percentage of outbreak alerts 
verified per quarter

TOTAL: 50 %

TOTAL: 50%

TOTAL: 100 %

TOTAL: 100 %

100%

Percentage of outbreak alerts 
contained

TOTAL: 100 %

TOTAL: 100%

TOTAL: 50 %

TOTAL: 50 %

50%





 HEALTH Objective 3: Strengthen capacity of health facilities for timely health services

INDICATOR

 IN NEED / BASELINE

TARGET

Number of health facilities supported with 
specialized Emergency Medical Teams

TOTAL: 4

TOTAL: 20

Number of beneficiaries reached with specialized 
healthcare services through Emergency Medical 
Teams

TOTAL: 13,000

Male: 35 % 

Female: 65 %

Boys: 17 % 

Girls: 21 %

TOTAL: 70,000

Male: 35 % 

Female: 65 %

Boys: 17 % 

Girls: 21 %





 FOOD SECURITY Objective 1: Crisis-affected vulnerable populations in Libya have access to sufficient 
and nutritious food. 
INDICATOR

IN NEED

TARGET

Refugees, Migrants 
and Asylum seekers

IDPs, returnees, host, 
non-displaced

Refugees, Migrants 
and Asylum seekers

IDPs, returnees, 
host, non-displaced

TOTAL TARGET

Number of people in need who 
receive unconditional food assistance 
through in-kind or cash-based 
transfers

TOTAL: 117,154

Male: 85,760 

Female: 16,101

Boys: 9,980 

Girls 5,313

TOTAL: 180,665

Male: 55,240 

Female: 50,835

Boys: 41,138 

Girls 33,452

TOTAL: 38,851

Male: 28,440 

Female: 5,340

Boys: 3,310 

Girls 1,762

TOTAL: 113,149

Male: 40,712 

Female: 37,465

Boys: 19,288 

Girls 15,684

152,000





relates to SO1

relates to SO1

relates to SO1

relates to SO1 & SO2



Number of people receiving food (in-
kind or cash-based transfer) through 
vocational/professional training to 
strengthen self-reliance

TOTAL: 117,154

Male: 85,760 

Female: 16,101

Boys: 9,980 

Girls 5,313

TOTAL: 180,665

Male: 55,240 

Female: 50,835

Boys: 41,138 

Girls 33,452

TOTAL: 0

Male: 0 

Female: 0

Boys: 0 

Girls 0

TOTAL: 24,000

Male: 7,338 

Female: 6,753

Boys: 5,465 

Girls 4,444

24,000



 
FOOD SECURITY Objective 2: Improve households’ food security for at risk groups by supporting 
agricultural, livestock and fishery systems, assets and control of outbreak of diseases 

INDICATOR

IN NEED

TARGET

Refugees, Migrants 
and Asylum seekers

IDPs, returnees, host, 
non-displaced

Refugees, Migrants 
and Asylum seekers

IDPs, returnees, 
host, non-
displaced

TOTAL TARGET

Number of individuals in 
need who received emergency 
agricultural inputs

TOTAL: 117,154

Male: 85,760

Female: 16,101

Boys: 9.980

Girls: 5,313

TOTAL: 180,665

Male: 55,240 

Female: 50,835

Boys: 41,138

Girls: 33,452

TOTAL: 0

Male: 0 

Female: 0

Boys: 0

Girls: 0

TOTAL: 24,000

Male: 4000

Female: 4000

Boys: 8000

Girls: 8000

24,000

Number of targeted individuals 
at the community level trained on 
animal disease prevention and 
contrrol

TOTAL: 117,154

Male: 85,760

Female: 16,101

Boys: 9.980 

Girls: 5,313

TOTAL: 180,665

Male: 55,240 

Female: 50,835

Boys: 41,138

Girls: 33,452

TOTAL: 0

Male: 0

Female: 0

Boys: 0

Girls: 0

TOTAL: 200

Male: 100 

Female: 100

Boys: 0

Girls: 0

200





 WASH Objective 1: Most vulnerable population groups affected by humanitarian crisis are provided with 
life-saving WASH assistance 

 

INDICATOR

IN NEED

TARGET

Refugees, Migrants 
and Asylum seekers

IDPs, returnees, host, 
non-displaced

Refugees, Migrants and 
Asylum seekers

IDPs, returnees, host, 
non-displaced

Total Target

# people with access to safe 
water supply

TOTAL: 69,970

Male: 57,284 

Female:12,686 Boys: 
10,145 

 Girls: 10,146

TOTAL: 196,949

Male: 105,407 

Female:91,542

Boys: 40,375 

Girls: 40,374

TOTAL: 15,600

Male: 12,636

Female:2,964

Boys: 1,092

Girls : 1,092

TOTAL: 44,400

Male: 23,976

Female:20,424

Boys: 8,880

Girls: 8,880

60,000

# people with access to 
sanitation services

TOTAL: 69,970

Male: 57,284 

Female:12,686 Boys: 
10,145 

Girls: 10,146

TOTAL: 196,949

Male: 105,407 

Female:91,542

Boys: 40,375 

Girls: 40,374

TOTAL: 7,800

Male: 6,240

Female:1,560

Boys: 1,131

Girls : 1,131

TOTAL: 22,200

Male: 11,988

Female:10,212

Boys: 4,440 

Girls: 4,440

30,000

# people reached with 
essential hygiene items (or 
cash) and information

TOTAL: 69,970

Male: 57,284 

Female:12,686 Boys: 
10,145 

Girls: 10,146

TOTAL: 196,949

Male: 105,407 

Female:91,542

Boys: 40,375 

Girls: 40,374

TOTAL: 10,400

Male: 8,424

Female: 1,976

Boys: 728

Girls : 728

TOTAL: 29,600

Male: 15,984

Female:13,616

Boys: 5,920 

Girls: 5,920

40,000





 WASH Objective 2: Ensure the most vulnerable children affected by crisis are provided have access to 
basic and safe WASH facilities 
INDICATOR

IN NEED

TARGET

Refugees, Migrants 
and Asylum seekers

IDPs, returnees, host, 
non-displaced

Refugees, Migrants and 
Asylum seekers

IDPs, returnees, host, 
non-displaced

Total Target





relates to SO1

relates to SO1

relates to SO1



# of children provided 
with basic WASH 
facilities in schools 

TOTAL: 35,285

Boys: 23,164

Girls 12,121

TOTAL: 40,300

Boys: 22,024

Girls 18,276

Total: 4,000

boys: 2,000 

girls: 2,000

Total: 6,000

boys: 3,000 

girls: 3,000

10,000

# of people provided 
with basic WASH 
facilities in health 
centres

TOTAL: 27,084

Male: 13,542

Female: 13,542

TOTAL: 24,019

Male: 12,008

Female: 12,008 

TOTAL: 4,000

Male: 2,000 

Female: 2,000

TOTAL: 6,000

Male: 3,240 

Female: 2,760

10,000





 SHELTER AND NFI Objective 1: Provide emergency shelter assistance to the most vulnerable 
populations 

INDICATOR

IN NEED

TARGET

Refugees, Migrants and 
Asylum seekers

IDPs, returnees, host, 
non-displaced

Refugees, Migrants and 
Asylum seekers

IDPs, returnees, 
host, non-displaced

Total

# of Individuals having 
received emergency non-
food items in-kind

TOTAL: 50,000

Male: 37,000

Female: 7,000

Boys: 4,000

Girls: 2,000

TOTAL: 30,000 

Male: 9,000

Female: 8,500

Boys: 7,000

Girls: 5,500

TOTAL: 45,000

Male: 33,000

Female: 6,000

Boys: 4,000

Girls: 2,000

TOTAL: 30,000

Male: 9,000XXX

Female: 8,500

Boys: 7,000

Girls: 5,500

75,000

# of Individuals having 
received emergency 
shelter assistance in-kind

TOTAL: 45,000

Male: 33,000

Female: 6,000

Boys: 4,000

Girls: 2,000

TOTAL: 2,600

Male: 800

Female: 700

Boys: 600

Girls: 500

TOTAL: 10,000

Male: 7,000

Female: 1,500

Boys: 900

Girls: 600

TOTAL: 2,000

Male: 550

Female: 550

Boys: 500

Girls: 400

12,000

# of Individuals having 
received emergency 
shelter assistance in-cash

TOTAL: n/a

TOTAL: 2,000

Male: 600

Female: 550

Boys: 450

Girls: 400

TOTAL: n/a

TOTAL: 1,000

Male: 300

Female: 300

Boys: 200

Girls: 200

1,000





 
SHELTER AND NFI Objective 2: Provide shelter assistance to most vulnerable IDPs, returnees, non-
displaced, migrants and refugees

INDICATOR

IN NEED

TARGET

Refugees, Migrants and 
Asylum seekers

IDPs, returnees, host, non-
displaced

Refugees, 
Migrants and 
Asylum seekers

IDPs, returnees, 
host, non-displaced

Total

# of Individuals having 
received non-food items 
in-kind

TOTAL: 15,000

Male: 11,000

Female: 2,000

Boys: 1,300

Girls: 700

TOTAL: 70,000

Male: 21,000

Female: 20,000

Boys: 16,000

Girls: 13,000

TOTAL: 15,000

Male: 11,000

Female: 2,000

Boys: 1,300

Girls: 700

TOTAL: 55,000

Male: 16,500

Female: 15,500

Boys: 13,000

Girls: 10,000

70,000

# of Individuals having 
received shelter and shelter 
upgrades assistance in-kind

TOTAL: 16,400

Male: 12,000

Female: 2,200

Boys: 1,500

Girls: 700

TOTAL: 60,000

Male: 18,000

Female: 17,000

Boys: 14,000

Girls: 11,000

TOTAL: 0

TOTAL: 35,000

Male: 10,500

Female: 10,000

Boys: 8,000

Girls: 6,500

35,000

# of Individuals provided with 
assistance to cover energy 
needs

TOTAL: 6,000

Male: 4,450

Female: 800

Boys: 500

Girls: 250

TOTAL: 17,000

Male: 5,000

Female: 5,000

Boys: 4,000

Girls: 3,000

TOTAL: 0

TOTAL: 2,000

Male: 600

Female: 600

Boys: 450

Girls: 350

2,000





relates to SO1 & SO2

relates to SO1 & SO2



EDUCATION SECTOR Objective 1: Scale up equitable access to formal and non-formal education for 
vulnerable school aged children affected by protracted crisis 

INDICATOR

IN NEED

TARGET

Refugees, Migrants and 
Asylum seekers

IDPs, returnees, 
host, non-displaced

Refugees, Migrants and 
Asylum seekers

IDPs, returnees, host, 
non-displaced

TOTAL

Number of school aged 
children (girls & boys) 
provided with essential 
learning materials/school 
supplies

TOTAL: 52,681

Boys: 31,608 Girls: 
21,073 

TOTAL: 40,299

Boys: 19,746 

GIrls 20,553

TOTAL: 45,0741

Boys: 27,044 

Girls: 18,030

TOTAL: 26,162

Boys: 12,819 

Girls: 13,343

71,236

Number of school2 aged 
children (girls & boys) 
accessing rehabilitated 
and repaired educational 
facilities/prefabricated 
classrooms

TOTAL: 52,681

Boys: 31,608 Girls 
21,073

TOTAL: 20,149

Boys: 9,873

Girls 10,276

TOTAL: 2,000

Boys: 1,200 

Girls 800

TOTAL: 12,500

Boys: 6,125 

Girls 6,375

14,500

Number of school aged 
children (girls & boys) 
accessing formal/non-
formal education services.

TOTAL: 52,681

Boys: 31,608 

Girls: 21,073

TOTAL: 30,000

Boys: 14,700 

Girls: 15,300

TOTAL: 45,074

Boys: 27,044 

Girls: 18,030

TOTAL: 26,162

Boys: 12,819 

Girls: 13,343

71,236

Number of school aged 
children (girls & boys) 
provided with school 
feeding meals

TOTAL: 52,681

Boys: 31,608 

Girls: 21,073

TOTAL: 30,000

Boys: 14,700 

Girls: 15,300

TOTAL: 0

Boys: 0

Girls: 0

TOTAL: 20,000

Boys: 9,811

Girls: 10,189

20,000





 
EDUCATION Objective 2: Improve the quality of education services in protective learning 
environments. 

INDICATOR

IN NEED

TARGET

Refugees, 
Migrants and 
Asylum seekers

IDPs, returnees, 
host, non-displaced

Refugees, Migrants and 
Asylum seekers

IDPs, returnees, host, 
non-displaced

TOTAL

Number of teachers and 
education personnel trained on 
child centreed and protective 
pedagogy

TOTAL: 500

Male:300 

Female: 200

TOTAL: 600

Male: 294 

Female: 306

TOTAL: 300

Male: 180 

Female: 120

TOTAL: 600

Male: 294 

Female: 306

900

Number of children receiving 
psychosocial/recreational 
activities in schools and learning 
spaces

TOTAL: 52,681

Boys: 31,608 

Girls: 21,073 

TOTAL: 40,299

Boys: 19,746 

Girls 20,553

TOTAL: 45,074

Boys: 27,044 

Girls: 18,030

TOTAL: 20,192

Boys: 9,894 

Girls 10,298

65,266





 EDUCATION Objective 3: Strengthen the capacity of the education sector to deliver a timely, coordinated 
and evidence-based education response

INDICATOR

IN NEED

TARGET

Number of education actors (f/m) 
trained on policy, planning, data 
collection, sector coordination and 
INEE MS

TOTAL: 50

TOTAL: 50

50








relates to SO1 & SO2

relates to SO1 & SO2

relates to SO1 & SO2



 LOGISTICS Objective 1: Provide logistics coordination, information management, support services to 
organizations responding to the humanitarian crisis 

INDICATOR

IN NEED

TARGET

Number of organisations benefitting from coord and 
information sharing role

+/- 40 international and national partner 
organizations

20

Number of organisations using common storage services

+/- 40 international and national partner 
organizations

15

Number of assessments conducted and made available to 
the humanitarian community

N/A

8





 
EMERGENCY TELECOMMUNICATION Objective 2: Coordinate the ICT response through the provision 
of shared connectivity and facilitation of security telecommunication services in common operational areas for 
the humanitarian community, collaborating with intersector initiatives to increase access and accountability to 
affected communities 

INDICATOR

IN NEED

TARGET

# of common operational areas covered by common 
security telecommunications network and data 
communication services

2

2

Information Management and collaboration platform 
established and maintained

1

1

Percentage of users reporting delivery of the service as 
“satisfactory” and within “satisfactory” timeframe

100%

80%





 
COORDINATION Objective 3: Support humanitarian leadership and coordination to ensure an effective 
and principled humanitarian response. 

INDICATOR

IN NEED

TARGET

Number of partners, including national and local civil 
society organizations, supported

+/- 40 international and national partner 
organizations

IDPs, returnees, host, non-displaced

Number of strategic HCT decisions made and implemented

Minimum of 2 decisions per meeting

+/- 40 international and national partner 
organizations.

Percentage of humanitarian partners satisfied with OCHA 
information and advocacy products

100%

Minimum of 2 decisions per meeting





 
LOGISTICS Objective 4: Guarantee a safe and reliable air service to the 
humanitarian community 

INDICATOR

IN NEED

TARGET

Number of passengers per month

N/A

225

Number of humanitarian and donor organizations using 
the service

N/A

50





 
MPCA Objective 1: Support vulnerable households to meet their urgent basic needs through the 
provision of emergency one-off cash assistance 

INDICATOR

TARGET

Refugees, Migrants and Asylum seekers

IDPs, returnees, host, non-displaced





relates to SO1 & SO2

relates to SO1 & SO2

relates to SO1 & SO2

relates to SO1 & SO2

relates to SO1



# of households who receive the full amount of the 
emergency one-off cash transfer (disaggregated by 
gender of head of household)

TOTAL: 1,500 

Female HoH: 450 

Male HoH: 1,050 

TOTAL: 1,200 

Female HoH: 600 

Male HoH: 600 





 MPCA Objective 2: Support socioeconomically vulnerable households to meet their basic needs through 
the provision of multi-month cash assistance 
INDICATOR

TARGET

Refugees, Migrants and Asylum seekers

IDPs, returnees, host, non-displaced

# of households who receive the full amount of the 
multi-month cash transfer (disaggregated by gender of 
head of household)

TOTAL: 1,500 

Female HoH: 750 

Male HoH: 750 

TOTAL: 10,100 

Female HoH: 4,040 

Male HoH: 6,060 

% of households reporting an improvement in their 
ability to meet their basic needs

80%

80%

% of households reporting a reduction in the use of 
negative coping mechanisms

50%

50%

# of market monitoring assessments conducted and 
made available to the humanitarian community

n/a

12





(Footnotes)

1 As population breakdown indicates about 60% of population is male

2 Average number of Libyan children per school is 500 learners per shift in public school. Estimates for community schools at approximately 200 learners per 
shift.

relates to SO1



PARTICIPATING ORGANIZATIONS & FUNDING REQUIREMENTS

ORGANISATIONSREQUIREMENTS (US$)
Agency for Technical Cooperation and Development (ACTED) 9,983,721 
Alemdad Charity Association 780,000 
Cooperazione E Sviluppo - CESVI 1,100,000 
Danish Refugee Council 4,520,932Handicap International / Humanity & Inclusion 
25,393,651International Organization for Migration 
1,000,000 
International Rescue Committee 
5,187,220Libyan Society for National Reconciliation and Charity 
4,448,958Mercy Corps2,060,000 
500,000 
7,228,000 
3,712,700REACH Initiative 
4,229,682United Nations Children’s Fund 
6,040,000United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees1,920,000United Nations Mine Action ServiceUnited Nations Population Fund 
1,460,000World Food Programme 
18,348,600World Health Organization 
46,548,388Food & Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 3,000,000 
1,600,000 
11,997,169TOTAL 201,624,438Gruppo Volontariato CivileINTERSOS Humanitarian Aid OrganizationNorwegian Refugee CouncilPremière Urgence InternationaleTerre des Hommes - Italy 
29,101,068 
11,464,349Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs

PLANNING FIGURES: PEOPLE IN NEED AND TARGETED

% female% children, 
adult, 
elderly*
People 
in needBY STATUSBY AGETOTALIDPsRefugeesMigrantsReturneesNon-
displaced97K 165K 148K 125K 288KPEOPLE IN NEED(NOV 2018)
AL KUFRAHAL JABAL AL AKHDARAL JABAL AL GHARBIALJFARAHALJUFRAHALMARGEBAL MARJEJDABIAZWARAWADI ASHSHATIAZZAWYABENGHAZIDERNAGHATMISRATAMURZUQNALUTSEBHASIRTTRIPOLIUBARITOBRUK*Children (<18 years old), adult (18-64 years), elderly (>64 years)
33%
30%
33%
34%
37%
26%
30%
25%
43%
40%
32%
32%
24%
23%
33%
29%
46%
36%
35%
31%
33%
31%
0.82M26 | 71 | 3%
25 | 73 | 2%
27 | 70 | 3%
33 | 64 | 2%
33 | 64 | 3%
20 | 68 | 2%
21 | 77 | 2%
19| 79 | 2%
39| 58 | 4%
34 | 63 | 4%
33 | 63 | 4%
28 | 69 | 3%
19| 79 | 2%
17| 81 | 1%
27 | 70 | 3%
23 | 75 | 2%
42 | 55 | 4%
31 | 65 | 3%
30 | 67 | 3%
30 | 69 | 2%
34 | 64 | 2%
27 | 71 | 2%
10K31K29K6K22K11K32K33K108K13K46K10K66K38K9K52K67K4K188K25K6K15K 
3K - 1K 3K 4K 
1K 5K 1K 10K 14K 
5K 1K 3K 10K 10K 
- - 2K 2K 2K 
6K 2K 4K 4K 6K 
1K - 3K 1K 7K 
3K - 9K 5K 15K 
3K - 5K 4K 20K10K 73K 7K 10K 8K 
3K 1K 6K 1K 3K 
7K - 1K 24K 16K 
4K - - 1K 4K11K 2K 3K 8K 43K 
5K - 3K 4K 26K1K 1K 2K 2K 3K14K 1K 8K 1K 27K 
4K 52K 8K - 1K 
1K - 1K 1K 1K13K 11K 75K 31K 58K 
2K 8K 2K 1K 12K 
1K - 2K - 2K 
- 6K - 2K 6K

2K - 1K 1K 1K1K 4K 1K 4K 10K5K 1K 2K 5K 7K- - 1K 1K 1K4K 1K 4 2K 4K- - 3K - 4K2K - 9K 2K 7K2K - 4K 2K 14K7K 52K 5K 4K 6K2K 1K 3K - 2K5K - 1K 10K 9K2K - - 1K 3K8K 1K 1K 3K 15K4K - 2K 2K 18K1K 1K 2K 1K 2K10K 1K 6K 1K 18K3K 41K 7K - 1K1K - - 1K 1K13K 8K 75K 13K 41K1K 5K 2K - 8K1K 0 2K - 2K- 2K - 1K 4K73K 116K 130K 56K 177K40%
31%
36%
40%
41%
31%
37%
27%
48%
43%
35%
33%
31%
24%
37%
33%
50%
38%
41%
32%
36%
31%
39%
5K20K19K3K15K9K20K22K73K8K24K6K28K25K6K35K51K2K150K16K4K8K552K35 | 62 |3%
31 | 67 | 2%
29 | 69 | 3%
38 | 59 | 3%
38 | 59 | 3%
26 | 72 | 2%
32 | 65 | 3%
22 | 76 | 2%
40 | 57 | 4%
34 | 62 | 3%
37 | 60 | 3%
28 | 70 | 2%
29 | 69 | 2%
20 | 79 | 1%
31 | 66 | 3%
25 | 73 | 2%
41 | 55 | 4%
38 | 59 | 3%
34 | 63 | 3%
31 | 67 | 2%
30 | 67 | 3%
27 | 71 | 2%
33 | 64 | 3%
% female% children, 
adult, 
elderly*
People 
targetedBY STATUSBY AGETOTALIDPsRefugeesMigrantsReturneesNon-
displacedPEOPLE TARGETED(NOV 2018)
AL KUFRAHAL JABAL AL AKHDARAL JABAL AL GHARBIALJFARAHALJUFRAHALMARGEBAL MARJEJDABIAZWARAWADI ASHSHATIAZZAWYABENGHAZIDERNAGHATMISRATAMURZUQNALUTSEBHASIRTTRIPOLIUBARITOBRUK*Children (<18 years old), adult (18-59 years), elderly (>59 years)

WHAT IF?

...WE FAIL TO RESPOND

THOUSANDS 
MORE WILL 
ADOPT HIGH-RISK 
EMERGENCY LEVEL NEGATIVE 
COPING MECHANISMS

Failing to respond will lead to 
an increased number of people 
adopting negative coping 
mechanisms, significantly 
increasing their exposure 
to protection risks. More 
individuals and families will 
shift from adopting crisis level to 
emergency level negative coping 
mechanisms as they become 
more vulnerable and less able 
to withstand the impacts of the 
crisis. These include, among 
others begging and socially 
degrading, exploitative, high risk 
or illegal work.

THE MOST 
VULNERABLE 
PEOPLE WILL 
NOT ACCESS BASIC HUMAN 
NECESSITIES

Without humanitarian support, 
internally displaced persons 
(IDPs), returnees, non-displaced 
people, hosting communities, 
refugees and migrants will 
not be able to access essential 
services, good and commodities, 
such as food, safe water and 
sanitation, and healthcare. 

The most vulnerable groups 
will pay a higher price. These 
groups include severely affected 
women, children, elderly 
persons, people with disabilities, 
and people suffering from 
chronic illnesses and diseases. 
Refugees and migrants will also 
be amongst the most vulnerable 
groups as a result of protection 
issues linked to refugee status, 
the irregular status of foreign 
nationals in Libya, racism and 
discrimination, socio-economic 
issues, and broader political 
issues related to controlling 
mixed migration. Refugees and 
migrants in formal and informal 
detention centres, as well as 
refugees and migrants from sub-
Saharan African countries who 
face specific discrimination as a 
result of the colour of their skin 
and prejudice towards certain 
nationalities, will be particularly 
at risk.

THOUSANDS 
MORE WILL FACE 
GRAVE THREATS TO 
THEIR BASIC HUMAN RIGHTS

Failure to respond will further 
increase protection needs for all 
people in Libya, whether Libyan 
or foreign nationals. Failure to 
create a protective environment, 
in which International 
Humanitarian Law, International 
Human Rights Law, and 
International Refugee Law are 
promoted and adhered to, will 
increase the number of people 
exposed to grave human rights 
violations and abuses, violence, 
and discrimination.



This document is produced on behalf of the Humanitarian Country Team and partners.

This document provides the Humanitarian Country Team’s shared understanding of the crisis, including the most pressing 
humanitarian needs, and reflects its joint humanitarian response planning.

The designation employed and the presentation of material on this report do not imply the expression of any opinion 
whatsoever on the part of the Humanitarian Country Team and partners concerning the legal status of any country, territory, 
city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.

www.unocha.org/libya

www.humanitarianresponse.info/en/operations/libya



