2019 
January - June 2019 
FLASH 
APPEAL 
ZIMBABWE 
Photo: UNOCHA / Saviano Abreu

02 
ZIMBABWE FLASH APPEAL 
TOTAL POPULATION 
OF ZIMBABWE 
15.1M 
PEOPLE IN NEED 
5.3M 
PEOPLE TARGETED 
2.2M 
REQUIREMENTS 
(US$) 
234M 
# HUMANITARIAN 
PARTNERS 
70 
0.4m 
0.4m 0.6m 
0.4m 
0.2m 
0.3m 
0.3m 
0.3m 
MASVINGO 
HARARE 
BULAWAYO 
MIDLANDS 
MATABELELAND NORTH 
MANICALAND 
MASHONALAND 
WEST 
MATABELELAND 
SOUTH 
MASHONALAND 
CENTRAL 
MASHONALAND 
EAST 
IPC Food Insecurity Phase 
1: None or Minimal 
2: Stressed 
3: Crisis 
4: Emergency 
5: Catastrophe/Famine 
IPC Projected Acute Food Insecurity Situation 
(Feb - May 2019) 
Source: Zimbabwe IPC TWG 
XX Food insecure people 
This document is produced by the Humanitarian Country Team and the United Nations Resident 
Coordinator’s Office in Zimbabwe, with the support of the United Nations Office for the Coordination 
of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA). The projects reflected here support the national government. It 
covers the period from January 2019 to June 2019. 

03 
JANUARY - JUNE 2019 
TABLE 
OF CONTENTS 
FOREWORD BY THE UN RESIDENT COORDINATOR 04 
THE FLASH APPEAL AT A GLANCE 05 
OVERVIEW 06 
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES 09 
RESPONSE STRATEGY AND RESPONSE CAPACITY 10 
SUMMARY OF NEEDS, TARGETS & REQUIREMENTS 11 
AGRICULTURE 12 
EARLY RECOVERY 13 
EDUCATION 14 
FOOD SECURITY 15 
HEALTH 16 
NUTRITION 17 
PROTECTION 18 
WASH 20 
REFUGEE RESPONSE STRATEGY 21 
ANNEXES 
LIST OF PARTNERS 23 
GUIDE TO GIVING 24

04 
ZIMBABWE FLASH APPEAL
Humanitarian needs 
are rising in 
Zimbabwe due to the 
combination of poor 
and erratic rains and 
a deteriorating 
economic situation. 
At the same time as 
we are entering the 
peak of the 2018/19 
lean season, high 
inflation 
compounded by the 
impact of the parallel market is drastically increasing 
the cost of basic commodities and forex shortages 
have significantly affected the supply chain for essential 
medicines. As a result, 5.3 million people are now in 
urgent need of life-saving humanitarian assistance and 
protection support in both urban and rural communities. 
Livelihood support will also be required to build 
resilience of the communities to soften the impact of 
climate and economic shocks. 
It is critical that we act now and mobilize resources to 
support the most vulnerable people in Zimbabwe cope 
with the multiple shocks that they have faced especially 
in recent months and to prevent more households 
requiring assistance. To this end, this Flash Appeal 
targets 2.2 million people that have been hardest-hit by 
the economic crisis and poor agricultural performance. 
The Flash Appeal complements the Government’s 
ongoing and planned interventions to respond the 
humanitarian situation. 
I am conscious that humanitarian support is not a 
long-term solution to the socio-economic challenges in 
Zimbabwe. Intensive effort is required to tackle the root 
causes of the rising humanitarian needs, and the UN 
is committed to continue to support the Government 
to undertake the necessary reform efforts as outlined 
in the Transitional Stabilization Programme. However, 
while efforts are being taken to address these extremely 
complex set of challenges, there is a moral obligation 
and an urgency for the international community to lend 
live-saving support to the most vulnerable. 
This Flash Appeal is prioritized and principled. We are 
confident that the activities planned are those that 
are most urgently needed and will deliver immediate 
relief to the most vulnerable. Built-in programme 
methodology is intended to deliver support effectively 
and efficiently. Most importantly, the UN and 
humanitarian partners are committed to ensuring 
that the humanitarian principles of impartiality, 
neutrality, independence and humanity are respected in 
implementing the activities in the Flash Appeal. We are 
here to support the people of Zimbabwe. We thank you 
in advance for your support! 
Bishow Parajuli 
UN Resident Coordinator in Zimbabwe 
FOREWORD BY 
THE UN RESIDENT 
COORDINATOR

05 
JANUARY - JUNE 2019 
Masvingo 
Matabeleland North Midlands 
Manicaland 
Mashonaland West 
Matabeleland 
South 
Mashonaland 
East 
Mashonaland 
Central 
Harare 
Bulawayo 
People in Need by District Masvingo 
Midlands 
Matabeleland North 
Manicaland 
Mashonaland West 
Matabeleland 
South 
Mashonaland 
East 
Mashonaland 
Central 
Harare 
Bulawayo 
People Targeted by District 
< 20,000 
> 200,000 
20,001 - 50,000 
50,001 - 150,000 
150,001 - 200,000 
5,001 - 20,000 
< 5,000 
20,001 - 50,000 
50,001 - 100,000 
> 100,000 
NUMBER OF PEOPLE IN NEED NUMBER OF PEOPLE TARGETED 
26 
8 
70 36 
partners 
NNGOs INGOs 
UN 
PEOPLE IN NEED 
5.3M 
REQUIREMENTS (US$) 
234M 
PEOPLE TARGETED 
2.2M 
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 1 
Save lives and 
livelihoods by 
providing integrated 
humanitarian 
assistance and protection 
to people impacted by the 
economic crisis and severe 
food insecurity 
STRATEGIC 
OBJECTIVE 3 
Strengthen the 
resilience of the 
most vulnerable communities 
to mitigate against the impact 
of the deteriorating economic 
situation 
STRATEGIC 
OBJECTIVE 2 
Provide life-saving 
humanitarian 
health assistance by 
responding to outbreaks and 
procuring essential medicines 
OPERATIONAL PRESENCE: NUMBER OF PARTNERS 
70 
FUNDING REQUIREMENTS BY SECTOR 
EDUCATION 
NUTRITION 
PROTECTION 
REFUGEES 
EARLY RECOVERY 
WASH 
FOOD SECURITY - FOOD ASSISTANCE 
HEALTH 
AGRICULTURE
$37.4M 
$130M 
$9.7M 
$3.2M 
$11.1M 
$4.5M 
$12.7M 
$16.5M 
$8.7M 
THE FLASH APPEAL 
AT A GLANCE

06 
ZIMBABWE FLASH APPEAL 
ZIMBABWE 
OVERVIEW 
The humanitarian situation in Zimbabwe is deteriorating, with the economic crisis 
compounding the impacts of erratic rainfall. Severe food insecurity has escalated 
during the 2018/2019 lean season (October – April), while access to basic 
services, and particularly healthcare, has become increasingly challenging due to 
the economic situation. 
Nearly 5.3 million people in Zimbabwe are estimated 
to be in urgent need of humanitarian assistance and 
protection during the 2018/2019 lean season (October 
– April) and beyond. This includes nearly 3.8 million people 
in rural areas, including 2.9 million who are severely food 
insecure (IPC phase 3 or 4) and a further 900,000 people who 
are currently receiving humanitarian assistance, without which 
they would be in IPC phase 3 or above. In addition, 1.5 million 
people in urban areas, including major towns and secondary 
cities, are estimated to be facing severe food insecurity, while 
people in multiple locations across the country are faced with 
acute shortages of essential medicines. With the ongoing 
macro-economic crisis, there is a high likelihood that the 
situation will continue to deteriorate. 
MASVINGO 
HARARE 
BULAWAYO 
MIDLANDS 
MATABELELAND NORTH 
MANICALAND 
MASHONALAND 
WEST 
MATABELELAND 
SOUTH 
MASHONALAND 
CENTRAL 
MASHONALAND 
EAST 
IPC Food Insecurity Phase 
1: None or Minimal 
2: Stressed 
3: Crisis 
4: Emergency 
5: Catastrophe/Famine 
Source: Zimbabwe IPC TWG 
In the three areas classified in IPC Phase 4 
(Emergency), there is widespread food deprivation, 
with many people going to sleep hungry and going all 
day and night without eating. The rural areas of Zimbabwe 
show a very precarious situation, with 30 per cent of the 
population experiencing IPC Phase 3 (Crisis) and IPC Phase 
4 (Emergency) conditions and about 20 per cent employing 
emergency coping strategies to access food. The most 
vulnerable households are experiencing moderate to large 
energy intake gaps, consuming a diet of very poor quality 
and engaging in accelerated depletion of assets through 
unsustainable livelihood coping strategies. 
This rise in severe food insecurity has been driven 
by a combination of factors – including late rainfall, 
abnormally dry conditions and the worsening economic 
situation – which are likely to prolong the lean season 
at least until May. Late and erratic rains have affected 
agriculture activities, such as land preparation and planting, 
and the 2019 harvest is likely to be delayed. In addition, 
infestations of crop pests, including Fall Armyworm and 
Tuta absoluta, have now spread to all provinces in the 
country, contributing to reduced crop production. The most 
vulnerable people reside in drought-prone rural areas, relying 
exclusively on rain-fed agricultural production for their food 
consumption and income, and have therefore been hardest-hit 
by these developments. At the peak of the lean season, these 
households typically depend on the market for food. However, 
sharp price rises have resulted in lower purchasing power and 
inadequate access to food. Staple cereal prices, for instance, 
increased between 50 per cent and 150 per cent above the 
five year averages and are expected to further increase 
across the lean season. In addition, the economic crisis and 
poor season performance have reduced agricultural-based 
livelihood opportunities and wages (both in-kind and cash). 
At the same time, high livestock deaths have been reported, 
along with unavailability of pasture, in predominantly cattle 
ranching districts. There has been a sharp increase of stock 
feed and agricultural input prices, and the recurrence of 
livestock disease outbreaks - such as anthrax, foot and mouth 
disease (FDM) and theileriosis - are further threats to the 
agricultural season.

07 
JANUARY - JUNE 2019 
SPATIAL RAINFALL DISTRIBUTION IN THE 2018 - 2019 SEASON 
MASVINGO 
HARARE 
BULAWAYO 
MIDLANDS 
MATABELELAND 
NORTH 
MANICALAND 
MASHONALAND 
WEST 
MATABELELAND 
SOUTH 
MASHONALAND 
CENTRAL 
MASHONALAND 
EAST 
Rainfall distribution 
Good 
Fair 
Poor 
Very poor 
Spatial rainfall distribution 
in the 2018 - 2019 season 
Source: ZimVAC 2019 lean season rapid assessment 
People’s capacity to withstand new economic shocks 
is severely compromised as the country has gone 
through repeated stresses since 2008. At the heart of 
the economic problems is a US$17 billion domestic and 
foreign debt and a $1.8 billion trade deficit that has worsened 
forex shortages. A rapid snap survey carried out in October 
2018 indicated high market volatility, as traders were aligning 
prices to the black-market exchange rate (RTGS 4:1 USD). 
The sharp increase in inflation (56.9 per cent in February 
2019 year-on-year), and 250 per cent rise in fuel prices are 
directly impacting on poverty and hunger. Meanwhile, public 
sector salary payments have not been adjusted to reflect 
price increases. In October 2018, the government announced 
a Transitional Stabilization Programme (2018-2020) to 
implement structural reform to ensure financial stabilization. 
INFLATION RATE 
-10
0 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
Jan-16 
Mar-16 
May-16 
Jul-16 
Sep-16 
Nov-16 
Jan-17 
Mar-17 
May-17 
Jul-17 
Sep-17 
Nov-17 
Jan-18 
Mar-18 
May-18 
Jul-18 
Sep-18 
Nov-18 
Jan-19 
These reforms are critical to: address liquidity challenges; 
stimulate growth and investment to increase revenue 
collection and foreign exchange generation; and protect social 
gains. However, their implementation will be met with critical 
challenges as the country’s protracted fiscal imbalances have 
undermined any effort to prioritize development spending, 
including social service provision, undermining poverty 
reduction efforts. Unemployment rates have been increasing 
as employment opportunities have continued to diminish. The 
high and unsustainable debt-to-GDP ratio; high fiscal deficit; 
cash shortages, and limited availability of foreign exchange 
are directly impacting on people’s lives; and the persistent 
shortage of essential goods, including fuel and consumer 
goods, remain major obstacles for any meaningful economic 
recovery. The impact of the economic crisis on people’s 
lives has led to demonstrations, unrest and growing concern 
regarding human rights violations. There were reports about 
people killed, injured, detained, and alleged cases of sexual 
violence. 
Zimbabwe is also battling disease outbreaks, acute 
forex shortages in the health sector and stock outs 
of essential medicines. In 2018, Zimbabwe recorded the 
second largest cholera outbreak in its recent history. The 
disease rapidly spread mainly around two suburbs of Harare 
city since September, and by early January 2019 more than 
10,000 cases including 65 deaths across the country have 
been reported. The country is also battling a typhoid fever 
outbreak, which has affected Harare and Gweru cities since 
2017, with more than 6,100 cases reported and 17 deaths 
since the outbreak began. The country also has a high level 
of HIV prevalence, affecting more than 13 per cent of the 
population. In the face of rising needs, Zimbabwe’s healthcare 
budget is chronically underfunded and stocks of essential 
medicines, diagnostics and supplies have been depleted due 
to foreign currency shortages. Many private pharmaceutical 
suppliers now only accept United States dollars and have 
dramatically increased their pricing. As a result, many 
people are unable to pay for basic health services, including 
vulnerable people living with chronic conditions such 
as tuberculosis and HIV, and refugees. Drought-induced 
migration in search of food may further compound the health 
situation as it could reduce the coverage of key immunization 
activities, which increases the risk of additional disease 
outbreaks. 
Malnutrition could rise in the months ahead due 
to increasing food insecurity, economic strain and 
unavailability and unaffordability of basic food 
commodities. The nutrition status of children in Zimbabwe 
showed a marked improvement in 2017, with global acute 
malnutrition (GAM) rates reducing to 2.5 per cent and severe 
acute malnutrition (SAM) to 0.2 per cent. However, the 
confluence of risks in the months ahead is likely to reverse 
some of these gains, especially in 25 drought-prone districts 
identified by the nutrition sector. Children under age 5 will be 
worst-affected, along with people living with chronic illnesses 
such as HIV. It is anticipated that more than 72,200 children 
could be affected by acute malnutrition (25,280 SAM and 
46,948 MAM) in all districts in the country between now and 
May 2019. In addition, 360,000 young children aged 0 to 23 

08 
ZIMBABWE FLASH APPEAL 
months, nearly 906,000 children aged 6 to 59 months and 
nearly 575,400 pregnant and lactating women with elevated 
nutrition needs or vulnerability in 24 districts are likely to be 
affected by food insecurity. 
Decreasing access to clean and safe water in both rural 
and urban areas is heightening the risk of disease and 
malnutrition. Only 49.4 per cent of water points across the 
country (mainly hand pumps) are fully functional, according 
to the October 2018 report from the Rural WASH Information 
Management System (RWIMS). Urban areas continue to suffer 
from overloaded and ageing water and sewage infrastructure, 
with intermittent water supply of an average of 12 hours per 
day, according to the most recent Service-Level Benchmarking 
(SLB) survey. The situation is compounded by the economic 
situation, which is limiting access to foreign exchange by 
urban local authorities to procure water treatment chemicals. 
An estimated 780,000 people remain at risk of WASH-related 
disease outbreaks, including cholera and typhoid, due to 
inadequate access to safe water. Poor rains have increased 
the burden of fetching water for children and women, forcing 
them to travel longer distances and exposing them to the risk 
of violence and abuse. Access to safe water also remains a 
challenge for the 20,000 refugees in Zimbabwe. 
Increasing food insecurity and poor access to hygiene, 
sanitation and water will particularly impact people 
living with HIV. Lack of food has a direct impact on the 
ability of people living with HIV to take their medicines, as 
the drugs cannot be taken on an empty stomach and also 
increase the feeling of hunger. People living with HIV with 
food insecurity run the risk of malnutrition and ill health. 
Lack of access to safe water and sanitation can have dire 
consequences for people living with HIV. Episodes of severe 
diarrhoea, cholera or other gastro-intestinal infections can 
accelerate the progression to AIDS, if untreated. 
Rising food insecurity and the growing economic crisis 
pose unique protection risks for women and girls. Girls 
are particularly vulnerable to family separation, early marriage, 
teenage pregnancy, domestic violence and extreme coping 
mechanisms during times of household stress, including 
transactional sex. The risk of exposure to domestic violence 
and intimate partner violence are also expected to increase 
as a consequence of heightened family tensions caused by 
crop damages and income losses. Poor rains have increased 
the likelihood of drought-induced displacement, as affected 
people consider moving to urban and peri-urban areas in 
search of jobs and food. Rural-urban migrants often end up in 
severely overcrowded city slums, which lack basic services, 
such as proper drainage systems, safe drinking water and 
proper sanitation. Migration due to hunger also increases 
the risk of sexual violence, exploitation, abuse and early and 
unwanted pregnancy. Meanwhile, restrictions on employment, 
the encampment policy and limited livelihood activities leave 
refugees and asylum seekers dependent on the humanitarian 
assistance for food. 
Lack of food, water scarcity and deteriorating access 
to livelihoods will impact the education of school age 
children, especially girls. School dropout is reportedly 
already rising, as families prioritize food, performance of 
households’ chores and casual labour over school attendance. 
Families with constrained budgets will prioritize food over 
school fees. For girls, in particular, school dropout can lead to 
family separation, child labour and early marriage. During the 
2015-2016 El Niño-induced drought, there was also a reported 
increase in cases of teenage pregnancy, impacting girls’ 
school attendance, and the pattern could be repeated if the 
situation does not change. 
Photo: UNOCHA / Saviano Abreu

09 
JANUARY - JUNE 2019 
STRATEGIC 
OBJECTIVES 
This Flash Appeal has been prioritized to target 2.2 
million of the most vulnerable people in Zimbabwe 
who have been severely impacted by rising levels of food 
insecurity, the economic crisis and disease outbreaks. The 
response targets the 91 hardest-hit districts, including 61 rural 
and 30 urban, which were prioritized through severity ranking 
based on multi-sectoral analysis of humanitarian needs. 
In addition, the Flash Appeal includes the procurement of 
essential medicine and medical supplies to cover 9.2 million 
vulnerable people in 80 districts who currently have limited 
access to healthcare. 
The Flash Appeal is intentionally time-bound, with an 
emphasis on responding to the most urgent needs during 
the economic crisis, the prolonged 2018/2019 lean season 
and in the immediate post-season. Action during this period 
is critical to save lives and livelihoods. However, should the 
situation continue to deteriorate, a revision and extension of 
the Flash Appeal may be required. 
Save lives and 
livelihoods 
by providing 
integrated 
humanitarian 
assistance 
and protection to 
people impacted by the 
economic crisis and 
severe food insecurity 
Provide 
life-saving 
humanitarian 
health 
assistance by 
responding to 
outbreaks and procuring 
essential medicines 
Strengthen 
the resilience 
of the most 
vulnerable 
communities 
to mitigate 
against the impact of the 
deteriorating economic 
situation 
This objective reflects the 
commitment of humanitarian 
partners to provide timely assistance 
to save lives and mitigate against the 
negative impacts of the economic 
crisis and poor rain performance 
on the most vulnerable households 
by reducing their food insecurity 
and livelihoods losses. Under this 
objective, partners will implement 
a protection-centred and multisectoral 
approach to humanitarian 
programming that alleviates the 
suffering, and reduces the risks, faced 
by food-insecure households. 
Under this objective, partners will 
ensure that health systems are 
enhanced to provide life-saving health 
response to current and emerging 
outbreaks. Increasing the availability 
of essential drugs in most affected 
areas is critical to prevent loss of 
lives over the lean season and during 
the peak of the economic crisis. 
Resilience programming will underpin 
humanitarian action, ensuring 
sustainability in the response and 
increasing households’ ability to 
recover and cope with future shocks. 
Under this Objective, humanitarian 
action will be linked with ongoing 
development and resilience 
programming to reduce future 
dependency. 
1 2 3

10 
ZIMBABWE FLASH APPEAL 
Strategy 
The Flash Appeal promotes a “cash first” approach, but also 
recognizes that, due to the economic situation and other 
complexities in the Zimbabwe context, cash will need to be 
complemented by in-kind assistance. 
The Flash Appeal ensures the Centrality of Protection, with 
a particular focus on preventing and responding to genderbased 
violence. 
Humanitarian programmes are implemented in full 
consultation with and involvement of communities at district, 
ward and village levels. The village prioritization and targeting 
processes are carried out by ward assembly meeting and 
they are facilitated by the District Committee and nongovernmental 
organizations (NGOs). At community level, 
beneficiary households are selected through a communitybased 
targeting approach, whereby villagers identify sectoral 
need using indicators/criteria specific to their area. This 
process is facilitated by UN/NGO personnel. There are 
grievance report mechanism (GRM) and support services 
such as help desk, suggestion boxes and toll free numbers 
provided to beneficiaries. These services provide a real-time 
feedback mechanism, which allow the different stakeholders 
(UN, NGOs, local authorities) to share information, verify 
grievances and address issues in line with the GRM protocol. 
Operational implementation 
Under this Flash Appeal, 70 organizations – including 62 
NGOs and 8 UN agencies – will implement activities in 
89 prioritized districts, in support of the Government of 
Zimbabwe’s response. Although Zimbabwe has primarily been 
a development-oriented context in recent years, humanitarian 
response capacity is quite well-established as many of the 
implementing partners have existing programmes in affected 
areas. The organizations in the Flash Appeal will undertake 
vertical and horizontal expansions and adaptations in order 
to rapidly adjust their interventions, including through crisis 
modifiers, to respond to the deteriorating situation. 
Humanitarian coordination 
The strategic coordination of the humanitarian response is 
undertaken by the high-level Multi-Stakeholder Consultative 
Meeting, which is convened quarterly and co-chaired by the 
Office of the President and Cabinet and the UN Resident 
Coordinator. The Humanitarian Country Team, chaired by 
the UN Resident Coordinator and consisting of the UN, 
NGOs, Zimbabwe Red Cross and humanitarian donors, 
meets bimonthly as an operational coordination forum for 
international humanitarian response. At the technical level, 
sectors are co-chaired by the relevant line ministry and the UN, 
while inter-sector coordination meetings take place regularly. 
Operational challenges 
The macro-economic situation – including the liquidity crisis 
– poses a number of serious operational challenges for 
humanitarian partners in Zimbabwe. Rising commodity prices 
(the official inflation rate in February 2019 was 56.9 per cent) 
and shortages of basic commodities such as fuel may have 
a negative operational impact, particularly in terms of the 
ability of humanitarian partners to reach people in need in the 
most remote areas. The inflation – should it continue – may 
result in increased operational costs. However, all possible 
measures are being taken by humanitarian partners to try to 
ensure that the transfer value of humanitarian funding is not 
lost. 
ZIMBABWE: RESPONSE CAPACITY AND RESPONSE PRIORITY 
BY DISTRICT 
MASVINGO 
MIDLANDS 
MATABELELAND NORTH 
MANICALAND 
MASHONALAND WEST 
MATABELELAND SOUTH 
MASHONALAND 
EAST 
MASHONALAND 
CENTRAL 
HARARE 
BULAWAYO 
Hwange 
Binga 
Chiredzi 
Hurungwe 
Mwenezi 
Gutu 
Insiza 
Lupane 
Bubi 
Gwanda 
Beitbridge 
Kariba 
Kwekwe 
Makoni 
Gweru 
Matobo 
Bikita 
Makonde 
Nkayi 
Gokwe South 
Zvimba
Mbire 
Bulilima 
Mutare 
Buhera 
Nyanga 
Umguza 
Chivi 
Masvingo 
Tsholotsho 
Mangwe 
Mudzi 
Sanyati 
Chikomba 
Chegutu 
Zaka 
Chipinge 
Gokwe North 
Seke 
Mazowe Mutoko 
Mberengwa 
Guruve 
Shurugwi 
Murehwa 
Chirumhanzu 
Mutasa 
Shamva 
Mount Darwin 
Hwedza 
Marondera 
Bindura 
Mhondoro-Ngezi 
Chimanimani 
Rushinga 
Zvishavane 
Umzingwane 
Goromonzi 
Centenary/ Muzarabani 
Uzumba 
Maramba 
Pfungwe 
Hwange Urban 
Plumtree 
Chinhoyi 
Kadoma Urban 
Redcliff 
Mutare Urban 
Gweru Urban 
Norton 
Shurugwi Town 
Kwekwe Urban 
Beitbridge Urban 
Masvingo Urban 
Zvishavane Urban 
Marondera Urban 
Karoi 
Chegutu Urban 
Rusape 
Victoria Falls 
Chipinge Urban 
Kariba Urban 
Gwanda Urban 
Chiredzi Urban 
Bindura Urban 
Gokwe South Urban 
Chitungwiza 
Epworth Ruwa 
Mvurwi 
Priority 1 
Priority 2 
Non priority 
Response priority by District 
XX No. of partners 
9 
18 
23 
19 
30 
25 
24 22 
24 
14 
RESPONSE STRATEGY AND 
RESPONSE CAPACITY

11 
JANUARY - JUNE 2019 
SUMMARY OF 
NEEDS, TARGETS & 
REQUIREMENTS 
0.4m 
0.8m 
0.014m 
0.014m 
People in need 
0.3m 
0.05m 
0.003m 
0.07m 
0.5m 
0.005m 
0.014m 1.7m 
5.3m 
0.4m 
0.7m 
0.2m 
0.7m 
0.7m 
0.9m 
0.014m
0.6m 
0.9m 
Health 
Nutrition 
Food Security 
Education 
Water, sanitation 
and hygiene 
5.3m 
2.2m people targeted 
people in need 
Protection 
$11.1m 
$8.7m 
$16.5m 
$9.7m 
$12.7m
$37.4m 
$130m 
$1.8m 
xx People Targeted xx Refugee Response Targeted Sector requirement 
$234m 
requested 
xx xx Refugee response requirement 
Early Recovery 
Agriculture 
$0.3m 
$0.3m 
$0.2m 
$0.1m 
$0.5m 
$4.5m

12 
ZIMBABWE FLASH APPEAL 
AGRICULTURE 
Agriculture sector partners plan to address the most urgent agricultural needs for vulnerable 
smallholder farmers in 30-targeted districts. Humanitarian actors will work closely with 
the specialized departments of the Ministry of Lands, Agriculture, Water, Climate and Rural 
Resettlement to assist targeted farmers to access inputs to help restore their productive 
capacity. To the extent possible, market-based approaches, such as subsidized inputs, cashbased 
transfers and input vouchers will be used as modalities for assistance. Livestock 
farmers in districts recording the highest cattle deaths will be targeted to access stock 
feed to improve the nutritional status and survival prospects of livestock. Working in close 
collaboration with the Department of Veterinary Services, partners will facilitate the emergency 
procurement of vaccines to undertake vaccination campaigns against identified livestock 
diseases. The sector response includes early action interventions that complement ongoing 
development projects undertaken by agriculture partners. Such activities include emergency 
rehabilitation of community boreholes, livestock drinking troughs and other rapid interventions 
designed to mitigate the effects of a poor rainfall season, protect development gains as well as 
strengthen the resilience of communities to future shocks. 
Priority actions: 
• Basic provision of crop and livestock inputs to vulnerable food-insecure farmers. 
• Managing crop pests and livestock diseases. 
• Increase access to water for agricultural production and drinking points for livestock. 
• Increase capacity of vulnerable farmers on climate resilient mitigatory/adaptation strategies. 
Contact: 
Constance Pepukai: 
constance.pepukai@fao.org 
PEOPLE IN NEED 
934K 
PEOPLE TARGETED 
576K 
# OF PARTNERS 
33 
$11 
MILLION 
Total required 
Photo: UNOCHA / Matilda Moyo

13 
EARLY RECOVERY 
The Early Recovery response will be implemented with the overall objective to stabilize 
livelihoods and rebuild the foundation for resilience of the drought-affected communities 
in targeted rural and urban areas. The response integrates humanitarian efforts with early 
recovery activities to restore the capacity of vulnerable communities and local institutions to 
recover from impacts of El Niño-induced drought, prevent further deterioration and shorten the 
need for humanitarian assistance. 
The response includes restoration of basic social and financial services, diversified livelihoods 
and emergency employment options and strengthening the capacity of local government to 
monitor and address humanitarian and early response needs building towards social cohesion 
and reduced social tensions. In urban areas, the early recovery response will also emphasize 
on WASH-related livelihood recovery economic activities. 
A gender-sensitive approach will be applied throughout the program cycle. Activities will be 
implemented in close collaboration with the Government, both at national and local level, and 
with affected communities in rural, urban and peri-urban areas. 
Priority actions: 
• Early recovery response through stabilization and restoration of livelihoods, emergency 
employment and enterprise recovery in rural and urban areas. 
• Creation of short-term emergency employment, including cash for work and start-up grants to 
recapitalize small enterprises. 
• Rehabilitation of community livelihood infrastructure and productive assets for microenterprise 
recovery. 
• Protect community livelihoods and provide alternative emergency livelihoods and 
employment. 
• Provision of access to short-term and tailor-made vocational training and facilitating job 
placement for youths where necessary. 
• Provision of and supporting access to IT-based information on commodity market situation 
and emergency livelihoods inputs and employment opportunities. 
• Strengthen the national and subnational capacity for monitoring and addressing humanitarian 
needs through the existing national Crisis Modifier mechanism for timely, rapid, early response 
to El Niño by partners who are already operating in the affected districts. 
PEOPLE IN NEED 
690K 
PEOPLE TARGETED 
153K 
# OF PARTNERS 
8 
$16.5 
MILLION 
Total required 
Contact: 
Anne Madzara: 
anne.madzara@undp.org

14 
ZIMBABWE FLASH APPEAL 
EDUCATION 
This Plan aims to ensure that children in food-insecure districts continue to have access to 
education services that support their physical, social, emotional and cognitive wellbeing. 
Schools provide a platform for cross-sectoral, pre-emptive and life-saving support to food 
insecure communities. Supporting education services during the food insecurity will enable 
children to build their resilience of the food insecure communities to withstand, adapt and 
recover from impacts of high-level of food insecurity. The link between adequate nutritional 
levels and school attendance and attainment of educational outcomes is extensively proven. 
Ensuring that children receive school meals, therefore, both protects the most vulnerable 
children from food insecurity-induced decline in nutritional status, and secure that their 
education is not disrupted. The Ministry of Primary and Secondary Education (MoPSE) 
supported School Feeding Programme in Zimbabwe has been temporarily stopped due to the 
emergence of cholera in the country. The Education Sector plans to resume the School Feeding 
for 338,388 children in the most food insecure districts. At Tongogara Refugee Camp, both 
primary and secondary schools are overcrowded and teachers must deal with up to 65 pupils 
in just one class. 
The Education Cluster will coordinate with the WASH Custer to ensure that sanitation and 
hygiene awareness is improved to prevent the recurrence and further spread of the ongoing 
cholera outbreak. This can have a significant positive impact on child health and learning 
outcomes. Life-saving messaging to teachers, learners and surrounding communities will 
be provided on WASH, health, nutrition and child protection referral pathways, contributing 
to behavioural change among affected learners. Close monitoring of the impact of the food 
insecurity on the education system, through training of MoPSE officials and teachers on 
emergency handling, strengthened coordination and information management - both at 
national and subnational levels - will provide an evidence base for advocacy and informed 
programming. A clear understanding of how the effects of the drought impact learning, and 
active response to ongoing evaluation will contribute to the promotion of resilience within the 
education stakeholders. 
Priority actions: 
• Support the provision of school meals and WASH services, including cholera prevention 
measures in drought-affected schools and cholera-affected zones. These activities will be 
carried out in close collaboration with the Food Security, Nutrition, Agriculture, WASH and 
Protection sectors. 
• Pre-position teaching and learning materials to reduce the burden of education costs to 
parents, as families will probably prioritize food over other basic needs. 
• Disseminate awareness messages on the importance of regular school attendance for 
children in emergency locations. 
• Coordinate real time data collection exercise to monitor school attendance and the strategic 
inter-sectional life-saving response interventions for children. 
• Train MoPSE officials and teachers on preparedness and early response to possible El Niño. 
By Sector Male Female 
People in need 455,748 218,759 236,989 
People target 338,388 162,426 175,962 
Breakdown of people in need and targeted by status, sex and age (approximately 3 to 18) 
PEOPLE IN NEED 
455K 
PEOPLE TARGETED 
338K 
# OF PARTNERS 
5 
$9.7 
MILLION 
Total required 
$9.2m 
Zimbabweans 
451k Zimbabweans 
4.8k Refugees 
333k Zimbabweans 
4.8k Refugees 
$457k 
Refugees

15 
JANUARY - JUNE 2019 
FOOD SECURITY 
Food Security operational partners will address the most urgent food security needs of 
communities in both rural and urban areas, as well as the refugee and asylum-seeker 
population. In addition to ongoing assistance which is covering an estimated 900,000 people 
for the period January to April 2019 and the Government’s Food Deficit Mitigation Strategy, 
operational partners aim to expand the geographic coverage to support an additional 700,000 
people in food-insecure rural communities that are considered in emergency (IPC phase 4), 
primarily through cash-based assistance. For urban communities, some 100,000 people will 
be targeted. Operational partners will also provide specialized super cereal food ration (CSB+) 
specifically targeting children 6-59 months and pregnant and lactating women. This will 
supplement the nutritional value of the food basket provided as part of the general household 
ration/cash. Intervention will focus on the low-lying areas reliant on rain-fed agriculture, where 
communities were disproportionately affected by last year’s erratic rain. 
Despite the current economic stress, market-based interventions are viable according to the 
national market assessment carried out by WFP and partners in November 2018. Based on 
the market functionality, a monthly transfer value of US$9 per person will be provided to meet 
approximately 80 per cent of the daily kcal requirement of an adult. With the current volatility, 
the prices and resultant purchasing power will be closely monitored on a regular basis. The 
high reliance on cash-based assistance will allow partners to keep people’s dignity, needs and 
preferences at the centre of the response, while increasing efficiency and flexibility. 
Given the high prevalence of food insecurity in urban settings (brought on in the main 
by adverse economic circumstance), operational partners will provide cash-based food 
assistance to the most vulnerable in Harare, Bulawayo and Masvingo. This urban intervention 
will use a vulnerability based targeting approach, prioritizing chronically vulnerable households, 
including the elderly, under-five children, disabled, pregnant and lactating women (PLW) and 
child headed households. Significant effort will be made to mitigate any protection risks 
identified and appropriate complaints and feedback mechanisms will also be put in place 
to ensure that affected populations can voice concern confidentially. Urban food assistance 
response especially in cash is new to operational partners therefore the initial phase will be 
piloted in Harare targeting 20,000 people. The intention is to scale-up the urban food security 
response to 100,000 individuals. 
This food security response is essential to address immediate food consumption requirements 
especially those in emergency (IPC phase 4). Intervention should also address negative coping 
strategies that undermine household food security and resilience. To address the underlying 
causes of food security, operational partners will provide resilience-building support as part of 
the response (see Early Recovery). In light of the multi-sectoral causes and consequences of 
the food insecurity crisis, operational partners will continue to coordinate with WASH, Health, 
Nutrition and Protection sectors to establish an integrated sectoral approach. 
In view of the poor agricultural season, food assistance at this juncture is considered disaster 
risk reduction and as such prevents further deterioration in the overall food security status 
during the 2019 post-lean season and in advance of the 2019/2020 lean season. This is 
particularly the case for those households already categorized in crisis and emergency (IPC 
phase 3 and 4). 
Priority actions: 
• Provide monthly food assistance through either in-kind or cash transfer to food-insecure rural 
households, in close collaboration with local stakeholders. 
• Provide monthly cash assistance to meet the most immediate food security needs of 
vulnerable people in urban areas, adversely affected by the current economic challenges. 
• In close coordination with the Nutrition partners, provide a protective nutritional ration to 
increase nutritional value of the food basket provided to households with children and pregnant 
and lactating women. 
• Provide in-kind assistance to 14,000 refugees. 
PEOPLE IN NEED 
5.3M 
PEOPLE TARGETED 
1.7M 
# OF PARTNERS 
21 
$130 
MILLION 
Total required 
Contact: 
Jens Nylund: 
Jens.nylund@wfp.org 
5.3m Zimbabweans 
14k Refugees 
1.7m Zimbabweans 
14k Refugees 
$128m 
Zimbabweans 
$1.6m 
Refugees

16 
ZIMBABWE FLASH APPEAL 
HEALTH 
This Appeal seeks to mobilize the international community to respond to the acute shortage 
of medicines, diagnostics and consumables in Zimbabwe stemming from the economic crisis. 
Although financial support has been received from various donors, this support has been 
directed at primary health-care services as well as programmes for specific conditions such as 
malaria, HIV, TB, Family and Child Health. The procurement of medicine will target 80 per cent 
of the total population in the 80 districts targeted in the prioritization of needs, amounting to 
9.17 million people. Procurement of adequate essential medicines and medical supplies for 
primary health-care centres (PHCs) will be done through the National Pharmaceutical Company 
of Zimbabwe (NatPharm). The stock management system will be strengthened to ensure that 
the consumption rates are closely monitored to avoid stock out. For refugees and asylum 
seekers, access to decent health care has also been undermined by national shortages of 
drugs. 
A mapping of vulnerability and response capacity will be conducted nationwide to improve 
preparedness and response planning. Disease surveillance and early warning systems will 
be strengthened through training of relevant health staff for early detection, confirmation and 
response to diseases outbreaks and other public health events through training in Integrated 
Disease Surveillance and Response (IDSR) and establishment of Rapid Response teams at all 
levels. Management of medical consequences of malnutrition and common communicable 
diseases - including cholera, typhoid fever and measles - will be enhanced through building 
capacity of health workers on case management of priority diseases. 
Health partners will support laboratory capacity for the National Microbiology Reference 
Laboratory (NMRL), provincial and district level laboratories through training of laboratory staff 
and procurement of relevant equipment and reagent. This will support timely and effective 
detection and confirmation of priority pathogens, and monitoring of drug sensitivity for 
effective case management. 
The health sector is coordinated under the leadership of Ministry of Health and Child Care, 
and through the Inter-Agency Coordination Committee on Health (IACCH), with WHO as the 
secretariat and sector lead. 
Priority actions: 
• Undertake a Vulnerability Risk Assessment and Mapping (VRAM) exercise to identify the 
hazard profile, vulnerabilities and capacities nationwide. 
• Strengthen disease surveillance/ early warning through training of relevant health staff in all 
provinces and local authorities in IDSR and providing logistics for prompt outbreak notification 
and response. 
• Strengthen laboratory capacity of the National Microbiology Reference Laboratory (NMRL) 
and all provincial health laboratories, including the Government Analyst Laboratory for early 
detection, confirmation and monitoring of disease outbreaks and other public health threats. 
• Strengthen case management for diarrhoeal diseases including cholera, typhoid fever and 
measles. 
• Procurement of essential medicines and medical supplies to ensure facilities are adequately 
stocked to manage disease outbreaks and other priority conditions at PHC level. 
PEOPLE IN NEED 
850K 
PEOPLE IN NEED 
11.4M 
PEOPLE TARGETED 
700K 
PEOPLE TARGETED 
9.1M 
# OF PARTNERS 
4 
$37.4 
MILLION 
Total required 
OUTBREAK RESPONSE 
MEDICINE PROCUREMENT 
FUNDING REQUIRED 
2.4M 
FUNDING REQUIRED 
35 M 
$37.1m 
Zimbabweans 
$324k* 
Refugees 
*Under the refugee response, $323,849 is required to provide primary, secondary and tertiary 
health services to all 14,050 refugees at Tongogara Refugee Camp.

17 
JANUARY - JUNE 2019 
NUTRITION 
Partners in the Nutrition Sector will work with the Ministry of Health and Child Care and the 
Food and Nutrition Council to provide life-saving essential nutrition services and strengthen 
community-based management of acute malnutrition. The response will also include the 
provision of community level Infant and Young Child Feeding in Emergencies (IYCF-e) support 
to parents and caregivers of children under the age of two in food-insecure districts with high 
levels of global acute malnutrition (GAM). The interventions will prioritize children and pregnant 
women at highest risk of morbidity and mortality in the 24 most food insecure districts. 
Community health workers will be capacitated to conduct active screening for early 
identification, referral and follow-up of children with acute malnutrition. Children with severe 
acute malnutrition (SAM) will be treated with life-saving therapeutic milks and ready-to use 
therapeutic food (RUTF), while children with moderate acute malnutrition (MAM) will be 
treated with ready-to use supplementary food (RUSF) and linked to protective rations from 
WFP, which cover children under age 5. To prevent deficiencies, children and pregnant women 
will receive micronutrient supplements. Pregnant women will be supplemented with iron and 
folate from health facilities, children aged 6 to 59 months will be supplemented with multiplemicronutrients 
through community support/care groups, as well as vitamin A supplements 
through health facilities and community health workers. 
In Tongogara Refugee Camp, more than 2,000 under-five refugee children are in need of 
nutritional support and over 1,000 refugee mothers will need nutrition education. 
Priority actions: 
• Increase access to and efficient stock management of life-saving therapeutic and 
supplementary foods at health facility and community levels. 
• Implement active screening for early identification and referral of children with acute 
malnutrition through community based health workers and community volunteers. 
• Build the capacity of facility based health workers on treatment, management and reporting 
of acute malnutrition. 
• Provide community IYCF-e support and counselling, specifically where cash and/or food 
assistance intervention are provided, in coordination with WASH and food security clusters. 
• Provide child and maternal micronutrient supplementation (VAS, MNPs, Iron and folate for 
pregnant women and increased consumption of fortified staple foods) and reach specified 
areas through village health days. 
• Continue implementation of community nutrition resilience program in all at risk districts to 
prevent an increase in acute malnutrition. 
• Conduct seasonal nutrition assessment in partnership with WFP, FAO, MoH and FNC. 
PEOPLE IN NEED 
72K 
PEOPLE TARGETED 
49K 
# OF PARTNERS 
7 
$8.7 
MILLION 
Total required 
Contact: 
Mathieu Joyeux: 
mjoyeux@unicef.org 
Thokozile Ncube: 
tncube@unicef.org 
Gabriella Prandini: 
gprandini@zw.goal.ie 
$8.4m 
Zimbabweans 
$306k 
Refugees 
56k Zimbabweans 
16k Refugees 
47k Zimbabweans 
2k Refugees

18 
ZIMBABWE FLASH APPEAL 
PROTECTION 
Prevent, respond to, and mitigate gender-based violence (GBV) risks, particularly for women 
and girls, in districts most affected by high-level of food insecurity is one of the priorities of the 
sector. Among other activities, GBV partners will provide risk analysis and advocacy, focusing 
on prevention, mitigation and response, strengthen referral mechanisms and disseminate lifesaving 
information about the availability and accessibility of GBV services. 
The GBV sub-sector will support the humanitarian community in ensuring that protection 
remains central to the entire response, working with other sectors to mainstream protection 
from GBV and reinforce risk mitigation. The sector will also advise the Cash Working Group 
under the Food Security Sector in the development of a GBV conscious cash assistance 
strategy to target the most vulnerable and at-risk individuals. 
Meanwhile, the Child Protection Sub-sector will work to ensure that girls and boys, especially 
the most vulnerable and those affected by humanitarian situations, are protected from all 
forms of violence, exploitation, abuse and harmful practices. It includes working with the 
Ministry of Public Services, Labour and Social Welfare (MoPLSW) to strengthen and increase 
sensitivity of the National Case Management Systems to humanitarian situation. Partners 
will facilitate capacity strengthening for early identification and prevention of child protection 
violations as well as case reporting, follow up and resolution for both welfare and protection 
cases. 
Lack of safety and security also continue to be a serious protection risk for refugee women and 
girls. 
Child protection priority actions: 
• Ensure availability and accessibility of quality comprehensive and vulnerability sensitive child 
protection services for all children with special needs including separated children, children 
with disabilities, children in contact with the law children with HIV and child survivors of 
violence. 
• Conduct a Child Protection Early Stage Rapid Assessment on the impact of potential El Niño 
on already poor households. 
• Enhance protection coordination at national, provincial and district level, including effective 
monitoring, response and prevention of violence against children, to inform targeted 
programming and timely response. 
• Capacitate district and community cadres for increased and efficient child protection system 
surveillance on child welfare and child protection emerging risks. 
• Strengthen Child Protection National Case Management System, including management 
information system to provide SITREP updates. 
• Strengthen the capacity of humanitarian sectors’ actors (Food security, Health, WASH, 
Nutrition, Education) on mainstreaming child protection interventions into humanitarian 
action, including establishment of prevention, mitigation and community-based complaints 
mechanisms. 
GBV priority actions: 
• Conduct assessments for the identification of GBV most at risk areas, as well as capacity 
mapping of multi-sectorial service providers in most at risk districts and establish community 
based protection mechanisms for GBV prevention. 
• Establish timely GBV mitigation strategies, including distribution of dignity kits, to reduce 
exposure for most-at-risk women and girls. 
$4.5 
MILLION 
Total required 
PEOPLE IN NEED 
464K 
PEOPLE IN NEED 
723K 
PEOPLE TARGETED 
372K 
PEOPLE TARGETED 
378K 
GBV 
CHILD PROTECTION 
FUNDING REQUIRED 
800K 
FUNDING REQUIRED 
1.2M 
$4.3m 
Zimbabweans 
$193k 
Refugees 
607k Zimbabweans 
193k Refugees 
450k Zimbabweans 
14k Refugees 
358k Zimbabweans 
14k Refugees

19 
JANUARY - JUNE 2019 
# OF PARTNERS 
26 • Ensure availability and accessibility of quality comprehensive GBV survivors’ multi-sectoral 
services such as health, psychosocial, security and legal support, through the establishment/ 
strengthening of referral pathways and the dissemination of life-saving information on 
available services in drought-affected communities. 
• Strengthen capacity-building efforts for GBV Sub-sector specialized actors on the application 
of GBV in Emergencies Minimum standards, as well as the capacity of humanitarian sectors’ 
actors (Food security, Health, WASH, Nutrition and Education) on integrating GBV interventions 
into humanitarian action, including on the establishment of prevention, mitigation and 
community-based GBV complaints mechanisms; 
• Enhance protection coordination at national, provincial and district level, including effective 
monitoring, response and prevention of GBV, to inform targeted programming and timely 
response. 
Contact: 
Child Protection 
Allet Sibanda 
asibanda@unicef.org 
Jeremiah Chinodya 
jchinodya@unicef.org 
GBV 
Verena Bruno 
bruno@unfpa.org 
Magdalane Chavunduka, 
Ministry of Women 
Affairs, Community, Small 
and Medium Enterprises 
Development 
magdalanechavunduka@ 
gmail.com 
Photo: UNOCHA / Tsvangirayi Mukwazhi

20 
ZIMBABWE FLASH APPEAL 
WATER, SANITATION AND HYGIENE 
The Water, Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH) response will be guided by three strategic 
objectives: (i) restore access to sufficient water of appropriate quality and quantity to fulfil 
basic needs; (ii) increase awareness of safe hygiene and sanitation practices, with a focus on 
participatory health and hygiene education (PHHE) and water conservation; and (iii) provide 
access to critical WASH-related non-food items (NFIs), with a focus on the most vulnerable 
families in the targeted areas. The WASH Sector will target more than 750,000 people in the 
most food insecure and cholera affected districts and peri-urban areas, including refugee 
settlements. The response is specifically targeted at WASH needs arising from and aggravated 
by the current cholera outbreak and high level of food insecurity. In the refugee sites, the 
WASH sector will target the construction of sanitary facilities, as well as additional boreholes 
and water reticulation systems. Finally, the WASH sector will also target 30 priority districts 
identified to be in IPC 3 and 4 during the peak lean season 2018-2019. 
The overall coordination at the national level will be done through the WASH Sector 
Coordination and Information Forum (WSCIF) and its Emergency Strategic Advisory Group 
(E-SAG). At the sub-national level, interventions will be coordinated through the regular 
coordination structures: Provincial and District Water Supply and Sanitation Committees 
(PWSSC and DWSSC). The inclusion of specific activities to monitor interventions including 
feedback from beneficiaries and communities will be promoted among the WASH partners as 
part of the implementation of this sector strategy. 
Priority actions: 
• Rehabilitation/upgrading/construction of strategic water points with a focus of maximizing 
use of perennial water sources to cover needs of institutions (schools, health centres) and 
vulnerable communities. 
• Conducting participatory health and hygiene education and awareness in institutions (health 
facilities, schools) and communities with high malnutrition rates. This will include training 
of environmental health technicians, village health workers and community health workers, 
supporting community-based counselling of caregivers on infant and young child feeding 
practices on critical life-saving WASH messages and hygiene practices. 
• Distribution of WASH hygiene kits, targeting caregivers of severe and moderate acute 
malnourished children. 
• Strengthening coordination and surveillance mechanisms at national and sub-national levels. 
PEOPLE IN NEED 
775K 
PEOPLE TARGETED 
393K 
# OF PARTNERS 
16 
$12.7 
MILLION 
Total required 
Contact: 
Ministry of Land, Agriculture, Water, Environment and Rural Resettlement 
Percy Mugwangwavari: percymugwa@gmail.com 
National Coordination Unit 
Lovemore Dhoba: 
zimwashcluster@gmail.com 
UNICEF 
Aidan Cronin: 
acronin@unicef.org 
Kwanayi Meki: 
kmeki@unicef.org 
$12.5m 
Zimbabwean 
$195k 
Refugees 
761k Zimbabwean 
14k Refugees 
379k Zimbabwean 
14k Refugees

21 
JANUARY - JUNE 2019 
Zimbabwe hosts a total of more than 20,000 refugees and asylum-seekers. This population 
includes 14,050 refugees who reside in Tongogara camp located in the Manicaland province, 
eastern Zimbabwe, and 927 refugees who are urban-based, mainly concentrated in Harare. 
In addition, 6,546 Mozambican asylum-seekers have been profiled, but not yet biometrically 
registered and are living among Zimbabwean host communities in Manicaland province. The 
total number of refugees and asylum-seekers is expected to rise to up to 25,000 people in 
2019, as displacement from the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) will probably continue in 
2019. 
The refugee response strategy focuses on the provision of protection and assistance to all 
refugees and asylum-seekers, both in and outside camp settings, including in urban areas. 
The protection environment will be enhanced through the engagement of refugee and host 
communities, organizations providing multi-sectoral assistance, and the host government. 
The refugee protection strategy prioritizes access to safety; reception, registration, status 
determination and documentation; advocacy for maintaining the humanitarian and civilian 
character of asylum; peaceful coexistence of refugee and host communities; strengthening 
of resilience and coping mechanisms for the extremely vulnerable; access to justice; and 
addressing the specific needs of children, women at risk and survivors of gender-based 
violence (GBV). Support to the development of the national asylum system remains essential. 
Specific protection services, such as GBV response and child protection, will be tailored 
to the needs of each at-risk group or individual. This will primarily be achieved through 
participatory assessments, surveys and verification exercises to identify vulnerable refugees 
and their needs. The needs of persons with disabilities and older people will be mainstreamed 
throughout the response. 
Food assistance will be carried out by the provision of in-kind food distributions as well as 
cash distribution. Livelihoods remain a vehicle to de facto local integration. More specifically, 
in 2019 the operation will optimize the livelihoods Graduation Approach to target the current 
population of the most vulnerable refugees, particularly persons with disabilities and singleheaded 
households with the aim of enhancing self-sustenance. 
The WASH Sector will target on the construction of sanitary facilities, as well as additional 
boreholes and water reticulation systems. The education system will be enhanced by the 
construction of additional classroom blocks needed as a result of increased pupil enrolment 
due to influx of asylum-seekers. Core relief items will be targeted towards refugees and 
asylum-seekers who are living in the Tongogara Refugee Camp. 
Given the protracted nature of the refugee and asylum-seekers situation in Zimbabwe, the 
sector will also work to ensure that this group is included in the national development plan. 
This could also mitigate the dire impacts of a decreasing funding trend at the same time that 
the influx of new people is on the rise. 
WASH and Shelter remains the critical areas that requires continuous support and investment 
in the camp. Though there is marked progression in water supply, sanitation and hygiene, more 
work is still required for the sectors to reach expected service standards. 
Priority actions: 
• Cash distribution. 
• Construction of toilets. 
• Procurement of soap and sanitary wear. 
PEOPLE IN NEED 
21K 
PEOPLE TARGETED 
14K 
# OF PARTNERS 
4 
$3.2 
MILLION 
Total required 
REFUGEE 
RESPONSE STRATEGY 
Contact: 
Pride Chifodya 
chifodya@unhcr.org 
Rudo Mefema 
mufema@unhcr.org 
Blessing Chaumba 
chaumba@unhcr.org 

22 
ZIMBABWE FLASH APPEAL 
ANNEXES

23 
JANUARY - JUNE 2019 
LIST OF PARTNERS 
Action Against Hunger (ACF) 
ACT Alliance 
Action Aid Zimbabwe 
Adventist Development and Relief Agency 
Africa Ahead 
Africaid 
Africare 
AQZ 
Adult Rape Clinic (ARC) 
Cluster Agricultural Development Services (CADS) 
CARE International 
Care Zimbabwe 
Catholic Agency for Overseas Development 
Catholic Relief Services (CRS) 
Child Protection Society Zimbabwe 
Childline Zimbabwe 
Christian Care 
Civic Forum on Human Development and Emthonjeni 
Women Forum (EWF) 
Combined Harare Residents Association (CHRA) 
DanChurchAid 
Deutsche Welthungerhilfe e.V. (German Agro Action) 
Epworth Development Residents Association (EDRA) 
FACT 
Farmers’ Association of Community Self-Help 
Investment Groups (FACHIG) 
Food and Nutrition Council (FNC) 
FAO 
Farm Orphan Support Trust (FOST) 
Future of Hope Foundation (FoHF) 
GOAL Zimbabwe 
Harare Residence Trust (HRT) 
Hope for a Child in Christ (HOCIC) 
International Medical Corps (IMC) 
International Organization for Migration (IOM) 
International Rescue Committee (IRC) 
JF Kapnek Trust 
Justice for Children Trust 
Katswe Sisterhood 
LEAD 
Leonard Cheshire 
LGDA 
LID 
MDTC 
Mercy Corps 
Miriro 
Musasa 
Mvuramanzi Trust 
NatPharm 
Nutrition Action Zimbabwe (NAZ) 
NCU 
Organisation of Rural Associations and Progress 
(ORAP) 
Oxfam 
Plan International 
Regional Psychosocial Support Initiative 
Southern Alliance for Indigenous Resources (SAFIRE) 
Save the Children 
SAYWHAT 
Terres de Hommes – Italy 
UMCOR 
UN Women 
UNICEF 
UNHCR 
UNFPA 
World Education 
World Food Programme (WFP) 
World Health Organization (WHO) 
World Vision International (WVI) 
World Vision Zimbabwe 
ZAPSO 
ZICHIRE 
Zimbabwe Red Cross Society (ZRCS)

REGISTERING AND RECOGNISING YOUR CONTRIBUTIONS 
We thank you in advance for your generosity in responding to this urgent appeal. OCHA manages 
the Financial Tracking Service (FTS), which records all reported humanitarian contributions (cash, 
in-kind, multilateral and bilateral) to emergencies. Its purpose is to give credit and visibility to donors 
for their generosity and to show the total amount of funding and expose gaps in humanitarian plans. 
Please report yours to FTS, either by email to fts@un.org or through the online contribution report 
form at http://fts.unocha.org 
DONATING THROUGH THE 
ZIMBABWE FLASH APPEAL 
Donors can contribute directly to aid 
organizations participating in the international 
humanitarian coordination mechanisms in Zimbabwe, 
as identified in this Flash Appeal. For a full list of 
contacts and information on humanitarian activities 
included in this plan, as well as information on 
humanitarian activities throughout the country, please: 
Contact the sector focal points 
identified in this appeal. 
CONTRIBUTING THROUGH THE 
CENTRAL EMERGENCY FUND 
The Central Emergency Response Fund 
(CERF) is a fast and effective way to support rapid 
humanitarian response. CERF provides immediate 
funding for life-saving humanitarian action at the onset 
of emergencies and for crises that have not attracted 
sufficient funding. Contributions are received yearround. 
www.unocha.org/cerf/donate 
GUIDE TO GIVING 
There are multiple ways to give to this flash appeal including the modalities listed below. 
www.unocha.org/rosea 
@UNOCHA_ROSEA 
https://www.unocha.org/southern-and-eastern-africa-rosea/zimbabwe

