HUMANITARIAN

2019

RESPONSE PLAN

JANUARY-DECEMBER 2019

UKRAINE

DEC 2018


Credit: OCHA Ukraine/2018/Agron Dragaj 



TOTAL POPULATION 
OF UKRAINE

42*
M

PEOPLE IN NEED


3.5M

PEOPLE TARGETED


2.3M

REQUIREMENTS 
(US$)

162M

# HUMANITARIAN 
PARTNERS

138

* Based on population estimates by the Ukrainian Statistics Service as of 2018.

AutonomousRepublic 
of Crimea*
ChernihivskaChernivetskaCherkaskaKhmelnytskaKhersonskaKharkivskaSumskaPoltavskaOdeskaLuhanskaKirovohradskaKyivskaZaporizkaZhytomyrskaDonetskaDnipropetrovskaVinnytskaTernopilskaRivnenskaVolynskaIvano-FrankivskaMykolaivskaZakarpatskaLvivskaBELARUSMOLDOVAROMANIAKyivSea of Azov 
Black Sea 
LITHUANIARUSSIANFEDERATIONThe boundaries, names and the designations usedon this map do not imply official endorsement oracceptance by the United Nations. 
5'kmalongcontactline' GCA20 
km along 'contact line' GCANon-Government Controlled Area'Contact line' as of August 2018*The Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the 
city of Sevastopol, Ukraine, temporarily occupied 
by the Russian Federation, as per the UN 
General Assembly Resolution 73/263

TABLE OF CONTENTS

PART I: MULTI-YEAR COUNTRY STRATEGY

Foreword by the Humanitarian Coordinator .................. 04
The humanitarian response plan6 at a glance ..................... 0
......................................................... 08Overview of the crisis 
Collective Outcomes................................................................ 14
Multi-year response strategy .............................................. 15
Supporting Humanitarian-Development Nexus ............... 19
Response monitoring ........................................................... 21
Response mobilisation ......................................................... 23
PART II: 2019 OPERATIONS
Summary of needs, targets and requirements ................. 25
Operational capacity ............................................................. 26
Humanitarian access............................................................... 27
Protection ............................................................................ 28
32Food Security and Livelihoods ............................................ 
Health and Nutrition ............................................................. 35
Water, Sanitation and Hygiene ........................................... 38
Shelter/Non-Food Item ........................................................ 41
Education44 ............................................................................. 
Common Services and Support ........................................... 47
PART III: ANNEXES
Objectives, activities, indicators and targets51 .................. 
66Participating organisations and funding requirements ... 
68What if ... we fail to respond? ........................................... 

FOREWORD BY

THE HUMANITARIAN 
COORDINATOR

Five years since the eruption of the conflict in eastern 
Ukraine, 5.2 million Ukrainian men, women and children 
continue to be exposed to the consequences of this protracted 
protection crisis, directly or indirectly. Shelling and sniper fire 
are a daily fact of life for those living near the 427-km-long 
‘contact line’, with over 3,000 civilians lost to this conflict since 
2014. Huge stretches of populated areas in eastern Ukraine 
are littered with deadly landmines and explosive ordnance 
posing a lethal threat to over two million people, particularly 
those living near the ‘contact line’ and five checkpoints where 
an average of one million civilian crossings occur each month.

The ‘contact line’ that divides what was once Ukraine’s thriving 
urban and industrial heartland, has also devastated service 
provision, markets, and social and economic networks. It 
also led to difficulties obtaining civil documentation, such as 
death and birth certificates. Paralysed economic activity is 
today forcing people to resort to stark and impossible choices 
between eating, accessing healthcare, buying coal or sending 
their children to school. 

The elderly, single-headed households with low income, 
people with disabilities and children are the most impacted. 
The elderly, who constitute 30 per cent of those in need, face 
immense challenges, especially when claiming pensions or 
other benefits. Households headed by people between 40 and 
60 years are more vulnerable than ever due to widespread unemployment. 
The crisis has severely impacted people’s mental 
health and the psychological damage will take a long time to 
heal.

Continued fighting has damaged homes, hospitals, schools. 
In 2018 alone, more than 85 incidents, including shelling and 
landmines, affected water and sanitation systems. Any interruption 
of the water supply can stop inter-dependent heating 
systems with severe humanitarian consequences, especially 
during the harsh Ukrainian winters. 

Our duty remains to alleviate human suffering by addressing 
the immediate needs of those most vulnerable on both sides 
of the ‘contact line’, with a robust set of prioritised actions, 
underpinned by a comprehensive analysis of over 55 needs 
assessments throughout 2018. When setting our priorities for 
2019, the protracted complex protection context, challenges 
and risks, as well as opportunities, have been considered.

Through this two-year strategy, our collective aim remains to 
reduce the need for prolonged assistance and, where relevant, 
to advocate for recovery and development efforts to be scaled 
up. Humanitarian and development partners have established 
a fertile ground for Humanitarian-Development Nexus. 
We will work with development partners, Government and 
donors to improve cooperation. As an initial step we have 
defined three “Collective Outcomes” – towards which humanitarian, 
recovery and development actors will contribute. 

I commend the Government’s approval of a National Strategy 
and Action Plan to address protracted internal displacement. 
This and other ongoing efforts of Government, such as the 
recent passing of a bill on mine action, are achievements upon 
which we must build. 

In 2018, more than one million vulnerable Ukrainians 
received critical assistance and protection services through 
the generous contributions of donors to the Humanitarian 
Response Plan. However, more could have been done if more 
funding had been available. 

For 2019, US$162 million is needed to reach 2.3 million most 
vulnerable men, women and children with assistance and 
protection. These requirements are comparable to 2018 and 
reflect the protracted nature of this humanitarian and protection 
crisis. The sustained support of the international community 
is needed more than ever.

I assure you that the humanitarian community will continue 
in its unwavering determination to alleviate the suffering of 
those impacted by the conflict. I am confident that through 
our dedicated commitment, our strong and diverse partnerships, 
we can make this solid plan a reality.

Osnat Lubrani

Humanitarian Coordinator/Resident Coordinator



 ‘I just want to be healthy and see peace’

With nothing left than a damaged house, serious illness, little to eat and no money to buy medicine, Oleksandra’s 
future looked bleak. The 72-year old, however, never gave up hope. Her strength and determination to survive 
coupled with humanitarian assistance helped her build up her life again.

Oleksandra is one of the 5.2 million people affected by the conflict in eastern Ukraine, which has been dubbed the 
‘world’s oldest humanitarian crisis’ as one third of the people in need are over the age of 60. Just like the other 1.3 
million elderly, she has been struggling with the dire consequences of the hostilities for the past five years.

Oleksandra lives alone on the outskirts of Donetsk where shelling, sniper fire and mines are her daily companions. 
Her pension is the only source of income, which is not enough to cover her basic needs. Adding to her hardship, 
Oleksandra suffers from cancer and requires regular treatment, which often forces her to choose between 
eating or buying essential medicine. “Even though I am old, I would like to live a bit longer,” she laments.

About a year after the conflict began, Oleksandra’s house was severely damaged in heavy fighting. “Everything 
happened very quickly. Two missiles landed in my yard and two others farther away. My house caught fire and 
was almost destroyed. Luckily, I was not at home at the time,” recalls Oleksandra. Facing this horrible situation 
just before the harsh winter, Oleksandra had nowhere to go. 

With little choice, she simply covered the windows with film, which did not really keep out the biting cold. The 
frail woman was forced to go out and collect wood whenever her health allowed. As her daily struggle continued, 
Oleksandra’s neighbours took her in for a few months. “I am so grateful to them for letting me stay after everything 
burnt down,” she says.

After visiting and assessing Oleksandra’s house, humanitarian partners brought construction material and began 
repair works. In a few weeks, the roof, ceiling and windows were restored. “Even though it was raining, the 
workers finished all repairs before the winter. I would have never been able to do it by myself.” she says. Oleksandra 
is one of the millions of Ukrainians who receive support from aid agencies to help them through the pain and 
struggle of the conflict.

After spending two harsh winters in a house with a leaking roof, Oleksandra can now at least feel warm in her 
own home. When asked about her biggest wish, she replied: “What do I want? What does any person want? I 
just want to be healthy and see peace.” She is not the only one. This wish is echoed in every village across eastern 
Ukraine, and it must be heard. 


Credit: OCHA Ukraine/2018/Yevheniy Maloletka 

Credit: OCHA/Valijon Ranoev 



THE HUMANITARIAN RESPONSE PLAN

AT A GLANCE

Vulnerability priorityVulnerability priorityVulnerability priorityVulnerability priorityLife-saving/core humanitarian priority2019-2020 STRATEGIC PRIORITIESGeographical priority
CRITICALHIGHMEDIUM/
LOWActions that mitigate loss of life, physical and psychological 
harm or threatsActions that contribute to the prevention of adverse effects 
of conflict on vulnerable peopleActions that contribute to the prevention of further degrada-
tion of the humanitarian situation
CRITICALHIGHMEDIUM/
LOWActions that specifically respond to critical humanitarian 
needs of highly vulnerable peopleActions that target moderately vulnerable peopleActions that target less vulnerable people
CRITICALHIGHActions in NGCA and 0-20 km area of the ‘contact line’ in 
GCA, adhere to ‘do no harm’ approach 
Actions in GCA beyond 20 km of the ‘contact line’
2019-2020 STRATEGIC PRIORITIES 

COLLECTIVE OUTCOMES

 2. Essential services 
1. Protection & livelihoodsDevelopment(UNPF/SDGs)
Humanitarian(HRP) 
3. Critical civilian structures
MANDATORY REQUIREMENTS

Inter-Agency Standing Committee (IASC) Gender 
with Age Marker (GAM) 
Accountability to Affected People (AAP)
• Actions must adhere to the HCT AAP framework.
• Actions must have AAP mechanisms, including, but not limited 
to, inputting to collective community feedback mechanisms. 
• Actions are marked according to the GAM code system.
• If projects are gender-blind, their submissions are disqualified.
PEOPLE IN NEED AND PEOPLE TARGETED BY GEOGRAPHICAL PRIORITY

NGCAGCA 
(0-20km of the ‘contact line’) 
(0-5km) (5-20km)
GCA 
(including IDPs, beyond 20km of the ‘contact 
line’)
2.2M1.3M0.8M0.2M0.4M0.5M0.4M*
People in NeedPeople Targeted 
0-5km of the ‘contact line’
* Including 0.3M IDPs living permanently in GCA beyond the 20km area of the ‘contact line’.



97$162MTotal requirements# of projectsCritical43Partners
26M1M135MHighLowTotal 
requirements
# of partners82312
PeopleUN
70M$162M78MINGO14MFunding bytype of partnerNNGONNGOINGOUN
3M1M4M4TN/A
Projectsby GAM*
8942197$162M435.2MIn need3.5MTargetedAffected2.3M
* 4T - Main programme purpose is increasing gender equality, including across age groups, 4M- Likely to contribute to gender equality, including across age groups, 3M - Likely to 
contribute to gender equality, but without attention to age groups, 1M - Unlikely to contribute to gender equality, N/A - Does not systematically link programming actions

NEEDS, TARGETS AND REQUIREMENTS 
COMMON 
SERVICES 
& SUPPORTPEOPLE IN 
NEEDPROTECTIONFOOD SECURITY &
LIVELIHOODSWASHHEALTH & 
NUTRITIONSHELTER/NFIEDUCATIONMULTIPURPOSE 
CASH ASSISTANCE3.1MPEOPLE 
TARGETED1.1M3.2M1.3M0.3M0.7M--
1.3M80K2.0M1.3M0.1M0.2M-31k2019 
TOTAL 
REQUIREMENT(US$)
NUMBEROF PROJECTS331313106164 742M 
CRITICAL 
REQUIREMENT 
48M 19M 
11M 
CRITICAL 
REQUIREMENT32M 
20M 
CRITICAL 
REQUIREMENT18M 
17M 
CRITICAL 
REQUIREMENT 
27M 
26.5M 
CRITICAL 
REQUIREMENT6.5M 
6.5M 
CRITICAL 
REQUIREMENT5M 
4.5M 
CRITICAL 
REQUIREMENT
6.5M 
6.5M 
CRITICAL 
REQUIREMENT
CLUSTER NEEDS, TARGETS AND REQUIREMENTS



KEY ISSUES

Direct impact of hostilities

Disrupted services
Lack of livelihoods and erosion of coping mechanisms
Curtailed freedom of movement and restricted access

OVERVIEW OF

THE CRISIS

For almost five years, millions of people have suffered the complex humanitarian consequences 
of the active armed conflict in eastern Ukraine. Despite numerous ceasefire agreements, 
civilians are regularly exposed to active hostilities, particularly along the 427-kilometre ‘contact 
line’ that divides the affected areas. Periodic lulls in hostilities provide little relief as civilians 
continue to face risks of dangerous landmines and explosives, whether on their way to market, 
school, home, hospital or crossing the ‘contact line’. Over 3,000 civilians have been killed 
and approximately 9,000 injured since the beginning of the conflict. The hostilities have also 
damaged and destroyed homes, hospitals, schools, roads, water supply systems and other 
civilian infrastructure, disrupting or cutting off people’s access to these critical services. With 
more than a million crossings each month and only five checkpoints with long lines and limited 
services, crossing the ‘contact line’ puts enormous challenges for civilians trying to maintain 
family ties and to meet their basic needs. The protracted nature of the crisis has also diminished 
the livelihoods of conflict-affected Ukrainians. Lack of or no income has stretched people’s 
resources to a breaking point, with families having to resort to negative practices like selling 
their vital belongings or reducing costly but necessary expenditures, such as medication. 
Mental health and psychosocial disorders are a growing concern that requires urgent action 
for millions of people, with children and the elderly most in need. The humanitarian needs in 
eastern Ukraine are therefore manifold and severe, with 3.5 million men, women and children 
being dependent on humanitarian assistance and protection services. Even if hostilities wane 
and landmines have been cleared, communities will need extensive support to regain their self-
sufficiency.

Devastating consequences of the violence

Eastern Ukraine remains one of the deadliest regions in the 
world, especially for the two million people who reside close to 
the ‘contact line’ on both sides. As International Humanitarian 
Law is repeatedly violated, efforts to protect civilians often fall 
short. Civilians who live, work and attend school in these areas 
must contend with landmines and other explosives on a regular 
basis. Ongoing hostilities and landmine and explosive remnants 
of war (ERW) accounted for 270 deaths and injuries in 2018.1
1. Office of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights, January - November 
2018.

 
More than 3,000 civilians have been killed and another 9,000 
injured since the conflict began in 2014.2
2. Ibid.

 Life for the men, 
women and children living in conflict-affected settlements 
is hard, and psychological trauma is deep and increasingly 
widespread. Healing will take time. 

Shelling and small-arms fire regularly damage thousands of 
homes and critical infrastructure such as hospitals, schools, 
roads, and water supply systems. In 2018 alone, water supply 
systems were disrupted 89 times by hostilities, landmines and 
other issues, affecting millions of people. Schools and hospitals 
continue to be caught up in indiscriminate shelling.

Whilst it is difficult to determine the exact number of missing 
persons, it is estimated that at least 1,500 people remain 
unaccounted for as a result of the conflict.3
3. International Committee of the Red Cross, “Hello Son, I’m Home”, Needs 
Assessment of Families of Missing, November 2018.

 Over 80 per cent 
of them used to be employed and the majority of them were 
breadwinners.4
4. Ibid.

 In August 2018, the Ukrainian Parliament 
adopted a new law on the “legal status of missing people”, 
which grants a person the missing “status” from the day they 
are reported and creates a Commission on Persons Missing 
in Special Circumstances and the Unified Register of Missing 
Persons. 

Freedom of movement restrictions shatter people’s dignity

Millions of people in eastern Ukraine face severe restrictions on 
their freedom of movement. The ‘contact line’ spans some 427 
kilometres and has only five official crossing points throughout 
the entire region. One of these is a pedestrian-only wooden 
bridge that serves the entire Luhanska oblast. Civilians who 
need to cross the ‘contact line’ to access pensions, hospitals, 
markets, social services, or simply visit friends or family 
often wait in long lines for several hours at checkpoints, and 
sometimes stay overnight, in a highly volatile environment with 
shelling and extreme levels of landmine contamination. 

Considerable efforts were made to improve crossing conditions 



by the Government of Ukraine5
5. MTOT reports that UAH 150 million for improvement works at the GCA 
sides of the EECPs have been allocated. Thus, three EECPs have been fully 
renovated and two are equipped with full necessities.

 and humanitarians, but 
overall the checkpoints lack basic services, including water 
and sanitation facilities, cooling points in summer and heating 
points in winter - particularly in the so-called ‘zero’ checkpoints 
(the territory between the GCA and NGCA crossing points). 
In 2018, over 50 people died or were injured by hostilities 
or sufferred serious health complications while crossing 
the checkpoints.6
6. The figure is compiled based on various sources, primarily OCHA daily 
field reports, UNDSS, INSO and Right to Protection. It counts only civilian 
casualties due to insecurity at the checkpoints and serious cases of health 
complications such as heart attack, strokes, etc. As such, it may not be comprehensive 
of all kinds of suffering and hardship endured by people crossing 
the checkpoints.

 An average of 1.1 million crossings were 
registered each month at the five crossing points in 2018, a 15 
per cent increase over the preceding year, as civilians continue 
to cross to access basic services and social benefits. Over half of 
these were above the age of 60,7
7. Crossing the ‘Contact Line’, Right to Protection.

 crossing mainly to collect their 
pensions in GCA. 

Ongoing hostilities and landmine contamination isolate 
thousands of people who live closest to the ‘contact line’. With 
constant violation of International Humanitarian Law and 
active hostilities near populated areas, almost 9 out of every 
10 households within five kilometers of the ‘contact line’ in 
GCA live in fear of shelling.8
8. Humanitarian Trend Analysis in GCA 2018, REACH.

 The situation in NGCA remains 
unclear due to lack of access and credible data, however, it is 
estimated to be as serious. In many villages along the ‘contact 
line’, hospitals, schools, transportation and basic services such 
as electricity and gas are frequently disrupted or in some 
cases unavailable. The isolated men, women and children face 
immense difficulties in accessing these services. While safety 
and protection remain their biggest concerns, people also 
urgently need psychological support, food and non-food items, 
shelter, water and sanitation, health care and education. 

The protracted crisis hits the elderly the hardest

The conflict in eastern Ukraine has a unique and 
disproportionate impact on the elderly. Of the 3.5 million in 
need, 30 per cent are above the age of 60. This is the largest 
proportion of elderly affected by a conflict in the world. These 
men and women face severe hardships when accessing essential 
services because they experience higher rates of disability and 
immobility and are often separated from their families. They 
are also more susceptible to abuse and neglect, have specific 
health and nutritional needs, and are highly prone to economic 
insecurity. Available evidence suggests that over half of food 
insecure people are elderly and 9 in 10 elderly persons in GCA 
rely on pension as their main source of income.9
9. HelpAge International, Emergency Protection-Based Support to 
Conflict-Affected Older Women and Men in the GCAs: https://www.
humanitarianresponse.info/sites/www.humanitarianresponse.info/files/
documents/files/helpage_baseline_report_usaid_echo_july_2018.pdf

 At the same 
time, this income is not sufficient to cover basic needs as over 
half of this money is spent on medicine and over a quarter on 
food.10
10. Ibid.

 

For pensioners living in NGCA, accessing their pension 
entitlement is a real challenge in itself. Adding to the 
cumbersome procedures established in 2014, additional 
amendments adopted in May 2018 created even more 
challenges to receiving any pension benefits retroactively if 
they were suspended.11
11. UNHCR Legislative Update, May 2018.

 Over the years, these legislative and 
administrative restrictions have had a disproportionate impact 
on NGCA pensioners. Of the more than 1.2 million pensioners 
in these areas before the conflict, only 477,000 pensioners 
from NGCA were still receiving their pensions at the end 
of July 2018.12
12. UN in Ukraine Briefing note: Pensions for IDPs and persons living in 
the areas not controlled by the Government in the east of Ukraine: https://
www.humanitarianresponse.info/sites/www.humanitarianresponse.info/files/
documents/files/briefing_note_on_pensions_updated_24_july_2018.pdf

 While the Grand Chamber of the Supreme 
Court’s decision to declare linking pension payments to IDP 
registration as unlawful was considered a welcome move, it did 
not result in a system-wide redress of this impediment. 

Healthcare - too difficult to access or millions

The conflict has not only hindered people’s immediate access 
to healthcare, it has also cut off the referral pathway that used 
to connect isolated rural health facilities with major health 
centers located in urban areas. Four in 10 civilians in rural areas 
of GCA experience difficulties accessing critical health care.13
13. Humanitarian Trend Analysis in GCA 2018, REACH.

 
The situation in NGCA remains unclear due to lack of access 
and credible data. However, it is believed to be serious. At the 
same time, landmines and other explosives contanimation 
contributes to diminishing access to health care. As years of 
conflict pass, the costs of health care borne by the affected 
people have significantly increased, including for transport, 
diagnostics, and medications. Lack of health professionals 
continues to pose another serious risk. Over 1,500 healthcare 
professionals have left the conflict-affected areas since 2014.14
14. Health and Nutrition Cluster.



Irregular supply of medicines and equipment deprive those 
highly dependent upon the availability of life-saving care. The 
risk of communicable disease outbreaks continues to increase 
due to frequent water supply damage and interruptions, 
damaged heating systems, as well as overall low immunisation 
rates, including basic childhood vaccines, such as polio and 
measles.15
15. UNDP Human Development Report, 2018: http://www.hdr.undp.org/en/
indicators/6430

 Previous reported outbreaks in Ukraine include 
polio (2015-2016), measles (2017-2018), cases of tetanus, and 
diphtheria were also reported – most of these are vaccine-
preventable diseases.16
16. Health and Nutrition Cluster



Increasing risk of communicable diseases

Before the conflict erupted, Donetska and Luhanska oblasts 
were among the most affected areas by HIV/AIDS in Ukraine. 
The latest available data also indicates a higher prevalence 
of HIV in eastern Ukraine. Issues such as displacement, 
migration, widespread multidrug-resistant (MDR) and 
extensively drug-resistant (XDR) tuberculosis (TB) further 
compound systemic gaps and contribute to the higher spread 



rates of HIV and TB in the conflict-affected areas and beyond. 
According to the latest validated data, standing at 16 per cent, 
Ukraine had the second highest estimated number of MDR-TB 
cases in the WHO Euro region in 2016.17
17. World Health Organization.

 

In NGCA, key challenges include lack of formal reporting by 
the de facto entities on the key epidemiological and health 
system indicators, which, in turn, limits an understanding of 
the real situation. There is also a need for re-training of medical 
professionals who have been isolated due to the conflict. The 
risk of further interruptions in the delivery of medications and 
health supplies to NGCA remains high in case of escalation of 
hostilities. 

Worrisome mental health and psychosocial impacts

Families in conflict-affected areas live in constant fear and 
face deadly risks every day with raging hostilities and extreme 
levels of landmine contamination. Evidence shows that there 
is a direct correlation between physical and emotional distress 
and the level of conflict activities – the higher the conflict 
activity, the more severe psychological trauma among the 
population. Decreasing or lack of livelihoods and income is 
another cause of distress for conflict-affected people as they 
are often forced to resort to some stark and impossible choices 
between eating, accessing health care or sending their children 
to school. Other factors include family separation, limited 
access to basic services including health care, increase in prices 
of basic commodities and angst over the unresolved conflict.18
18. International Medical Corps and Premiere Urgence Internationale: Rapid 
Mental Health and Psychosocial Support Assessment for conflict-affected communities 
of Donetska oblast (February 2018).

 
The cumulative impact of the conflict is severe and high levels 
of psychological distress among the population have been 
reported across the conflict-affected areas. 

Psychological stress and mental health problems have 
been associated with poor lifestyle and risky behaviours.19
19. In Donetska oblast alone, most common signs of distress among men 
was “drinking” and “alcohol use,” followed by “aggressive” behaviour and 
outward displays of anger. Men are less likely to show emotions, making it difficult 
to know if they are feeling distressed. Common sign of distress identified 
by women were changes in behavioural presentation of emotions or difficulty 
in regulating emotions, Rapid Mental Health and Psychosocial Support Assessment 
for Conflict-Affected Communities of Donetska Oblast (February 2018), 
International Medical Corps and Premiere Urgence Internationale.

 
Psychosocial support (PSS) remains one of the most requested 
forms of assistance by conflict-affected people. Those with 
chronic and severe mental disorders (e.g. psychotic disorders) 
are especially vulnerable during times of hardship, conflict and 
displacement. 

Against this background, lack of mental health and 
psychosocial support services (MHPSS) pose a serious 
challenge. Two-thirds of households do not know where to 
access mental healthcare services, and 75 per cent of families 
living close to the ‘contact line’ in GCA report unavailability of 
or do not know where to access psychosocial support services.20
20. Humanitarian Trend Analysis in GCA 2018, REACH.

 
In NGCA, available evidence suggests increasing demands for 
urgent psychosocial support.

Children are not spared from the conflict

The conflict also continues to endanger the physical and 
psychological wellbeing of children, especially those living 
along the ‘contact line’ where active hostilities are most 
intense and threaten education facilities. More than 242,000 
children and teachers in schools located along the ‘contact line’ 
regularly experience shelling and face extreme levels of mine-
contamination. More than 150 schools in eastern Ukraine were 
concerned about their proximity to military activities and 62 
schools reported unexploded ordnance near them.21
21. Education Cluster.

 Children 
commute along unsafe routes to schools. In a single incident in 
May 2018, a child was killed and three more injured from an 
explosion in their school bus. 

Attacks on schools are frequent. Since the start of the conflict 
over 750 educational facilities have been damaged due to 
hostilities.22
22. Ibid.

 On several occasions, education facilities were 
damaged more than once. Alarmingly, not all the education 
facilities that are regularly exposed to shelling have adequately 
equipped or accessible bomb shelters or safe spaces.

Risk from landmines and explosive remnants of war

Explosive hazards endanger millions of men, women and 
children in eastern Ukraine. An estimated two million people 
are affected by landmines and ERW contamination in GCA, 
while almost one in three households along the ‘contact line’ 
perceived these hazards in their communities.23
23. Humanitarian Trend Analysis in GCA 2018, REACH.

 The situation 
in NGCA remains difficult to ascertain due to lack of access to 
conduct any technical assessment, however, it is believed to be 
serious. 

For three consecutive years, Ukraine had more anti-vehicle 
mine incidents than any other country in the world.24
24. Humanitarian and Development Impact of Anti-Vehicle Mines, GICHD, 
SIPRI: https://www.gichd.org/fileadmin/GICHD-resources/rec-documents/
Brochure_AVM_2017_web.pdf

 Since 
the start of the hostilities in 2014, at least 924 civilians have 
been killed or injured by landmines and ERW.25
25. Office of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights, 2014 - November 
2018.

 The risk 
usually increases during the harvesting season when farmers 
are working in their fields. This risk has a detrimental socio-
economic impact as farmers become reluctant to cultivate their 
land and look after their livestock. These explosive hazards put 
essential civilian structures at risk and severely impact children’s 
lives. Places where children used to play are now dotted with 
explosives making them a death trap. Mine-related incidents 
and mishandling of ERW accounted for 65 per cent of child 
casualties in 2017 and 2018.26
26. Protection Cluster “Mine Action in Ukraine” (February 2018).

 In one single tragic incident in 
September, three children were killed by a landmine near the 
‘contact line’.

On 6 December, the Ukrainian Parliament approved the Mine 
Action Bill, which should pave the way to establish a national 
Mine Action Coordination entity and significantly scale-up the 
much-needed mine action efforts. Meanwhile, vital mine action 
work continues, including mine risk education, clearing of 



CRISIS TIMELINE

May 2014Presidential elections. Self- proclamationof so-called ‘Donetsk people’s republic’
& ‘Luhansk people’s republic’ 
February 2015July 2015De-facto entities required‘accreditation/registration’ in NGCA.
Humanitarian aid delivery to the area 
suspended 
Crisis in eastern Ukraine continuedwith major humanitarian implications 
January 2015Minsk II signed. Provisions includedfacilitation of humanitarian assistanceDecember 2014Temporary Order on ‘Control of the Movement of People, 
Transport Vehicles and Cargo along the ‘contact line’ in 
Donetsk and Luhansk regions’ introduced. Checkpoints 
across the ‘contact line’ opened in the last quarter of 2015February 2017January 2017Rapid deterioration of security situation. 
Government approved an Action Plan 
on ‘reintegration of NGCA’The near miss hit of the chlorine gasdepot at Donetsk Filter StationMarch 2017De-facto entities introduced ‘external 
management’ of Ukraine-based companies 
and declared the ‘contact line’ as a ‘state 
border’Spike in hostilities in Krasnohorivka and 
Mariinka close to the ‘contact line’May 2017July 2017De-facto entities announced changes in the so-called 
‘accreditation/registration’ procedures of humanitari-
an missions and activitiesFebruary 2018September 2014Minsk protocol signedMarch 2016Social payments to over 600,000 IDPs 
suspended. Opening of a new checkpoint 
Zolote failedFebruary 2016Security situation deteriorated, 
intermittent closure of checkpointsJune 2016April 2018The Joint Forces Operation (JFO) cameinto force, replacing the ‘Anti-Terrorist 
Operation’ (ATO) 
Law # 2268 on ‘Reintegration of Donbas’ 
came into force on 24 FebruaryJune 2018United Nations Security Council (UNSC) issued 
a Presidential Statement following a UNSC 
brieng, calling to upscale humanitarian eorts 
September 2018Grand Chamber of Supreme Courtrules unlawful to suspend pensionsfor IDPs based on verication groundsNovember 2017GoU approves ‘Strategy of Integration IDPs 
and Implementation of Long-Term Solutions 
to Internal Displacement until 2020’
August 2018The law on ‘Legal Status of 
Missing Persons’ came into force 
November 2018Adoption of an Action Plan to support implementationof the National IDP Strategy. Martial Law implemented 
in ten Ukrainian oblasts including Donetskaand Luhanska for 30 days 
June 2018CERF rapid response allocation of 
$5.9million to UN agenciesDecember 2018Adoption of Law on Mine Action 
The Ministry of Temporarily 
Occupied Territories and IDPs was 
established

contaminated areas and assistance to victims.27
27. Mine-Action in Ukraine: https://www.humanitarianresponse.info/sites/
www.humanitarianresponse.info/files/documents/files/2018_02_protection_
cluster_-_mine_action_en.pdf

 

Critical civilian structures under attack

For nearly five years, armed clashes have damaged and 
destroyed critical civilian infrastructure, including houses, 
hospitals, schools, water, electricity and gas supply systems. 
Access to these facilities and services has long become a daily 
struggle for millions of people. In 2018, there were 89 incidents 
against water and sanitation facilities. In a single incident in 
April 2018, five workers at the Donetsk Filter Station (DFS) 
were injured by gunfire, while two were seriously injured 
in a mine-related incident in October. Since the start of the 
conflict, over 30 water workers have been killed or injured due 
to hostilities, while many more are risking their lives on a daily 
basis to ensure that water and heating continue to be supplied 
to millions of people on both sides of the ‘contact line’. Similarly, 
critical wastewater treatment plants and hygiene utilities, 
power lines and gas supply systems are regularly impacted 
by hostilities. Safety guarantees called “windows of silence” 
are essential for technicians to repair the damage, however, 
they were not always obtained immediately. When they were 
obtained, they were not always upheld, forcing the repair teams 
to take refuge under shelling, while leaving millions of people 
without the essential services.

Since the conflict began, over 50,000 homes on both sides of 
the ‘contact line’ have been damaged, with some 520 of them 
damaged in the first half of 2018 alone. The number of families 
who live in desperate conditions due to damaged homes 
continues to increase. The homes of some 40,000 families living 
along the ‘contact line’ are in urgent need of repair to withstand 
the harsh winter, which starts in eastern Ukraine as early as 
November and lasts until March. 

Freezing winters and scorching summers

Ukraine’s harsh winter with temperatures below 15 degrees 
Celsius generates acute needs. Financial strains make home 
repairs often impossible, so families sometimes either have to 
live in inadequate housing or move elsewhere. Rural families 
spend over 20 per cent of their limited income on heating, 
and their food consumption scores are nearly halved during 
winter.28
28. REACH Winter Assessment of Government-Controlled Areas, February 
2018.

 Bad road conditions make basic services even more 
difficult to access in winter than any other time of the year.29
29. Ibid.

 
Higher utility costs force families to make cuts in other 
much-needed areas, such as medication, schooling or even 
food. Those households who are unable to afford the costs are 
forced to collect firewood, often in areas contaminated with 
landmines. Active shelling also threatens centralised heating 
systems. The country’s extreme weather is no different in 
the summers with temperatures reaching record levels of 30 
plus degrees Celsius. This makes crossing conditions at the 
checkpoints a real hardship, especially for the elderly, children, 
pregnant women and people with disabilities. 

Loss of livelihoods and rising unemployment

Socio-economic conditions continue to deteriorate, particularly 
in NGCA, threatening livelihoods and wellbeing of the 
population. There is a clear correlation between food insecurity, 
vulnerability and socio-economic trends.30
30. Food Security and Livelihoods Cluster, Food Security & Socio-Economic 
Trend Analysis – Eastern Ukraine, March 2018.

 Increasing conflict-
related poverty and unemployment rates affect the standards 
of living and pose risks to people’s health.31
31. WFP Ukraine “Study on Social Protection and Safety Nets in Ukraine”, 
2017.

 Accessing food is 
also a challenge due to active hostilities, especially for 16 per 
cent of households closest to the ‘contact line’ in GCA, who 
are at poor and borderline food consumption scores.32
32. Humanitarian Trend Analysis in GCA 2018, REACH: https://reliefweb.
int/report/ukhttps://reliefweb.int/report/ukraine/humanitarian-trend-analysis-
fact-sheet-government-controlled-areas-donetsk-and

 While 
unemployment is on the rise in both Donetska and Luhanska 
oblasts, businesses also have trouble finding skilled workers, 
further compromising their productivity.33
33. REACH – Thematic Assessment of Local Enterprises and Labour Markets 
in Eastern Ukraine , March 2017.

 

Civil documentation remains a challenge

Conflict-affected people face difficulties when trying to access 
official documents, including identity papers, civil status and 
property documentation. This has a pervasive impact on every 
aspect of their lives – limiting their access to services and 
benefits and their freedom of movement, particularly in the 
areas along the ‘contact line’. A generation of nearly 100,000 
graduates in NGCA is at risk of having fewer opportunities for 
employment and higher education outside NGCA,34
34. These are regulated by the Procedure of Enrolment for Obtaining Higher 
and Vocational Education for Persons Residing in the Areas of the Anti-Terrorist 
Operation (for the period of Period of Its Duration), approved by Order No. 
697 of 21 June 2016 of the Ministry of Education and Science.

 which is 
due to complications around authentication and legitimisation 
of documentation. As part of awareness raising efforts, the 
Government of Ukraine has conducted a number of events 
to encourage enrollment and explain the special terms of 
enrolment in education facilities in GCA, with some 3,000 
students who obtained consultations and over 1,500 students 
from NGCA enrolled under simplified procedures to education 
facilities in GCA in 2018, according to MTOT.35
35. An inclusive inter-governmental Working Group, including with key UN 
agencies, has been established and a draft law prepared “On Making Amendments 
to Some Laws of Ukraine with Regard to the Implementation of the Administrative 
Procedure for State Registration of Facts of Births and Deaths That 
Took Place in the Temporarily Occupied Territories of Ukraine’, which provides 
for the implementation of an administrative procedure for state registration of 
facts of births and deaths. The draft law is being finalized by consideration by 
the Government.



There is an increased concern about the risk of statelessness, as 
a review of court records suggests that only an estimated 43 per 
cent of children born in NGCA have obtained a birth certificate 
issued by the Government of Ukraine.36
36. Protection Cluster.

 A birth certificate is 
a precondition for a child’s access to the entire spectrum of 
rights and critical state services, such as education and health 



care. Even though a judicial procedure37
37. Outlined in Article 317of the Civil Procedure Code of Ukraine. Law “On 
particular aspects of public policy aimed at safeguarding state sovereignty 
of Ukraine over the temporarily occupied territory of Donetsk and Luhansk 
regions” introduces an exception to the general rule of non-recognition of 
documents issued in the territory not controlled by the Government for birth- 
and death-related documents that “shall be attached to the applications for 
registration of birth or death”. This requires the Ministry of Justice to introduce 
an administrative procedure on registration of birth and death occurring in 
the territory not controlled by the Government as is also envisaged in the National 
Human Rights Action Plan (points 126(3) and 129(1)). As this exception 
is introduced only for documents issued in certain areas of the Donetsk and 
Luhansk regions.

 allows parents from 
NGCA to obtain birth certificates, the steps are complex and 
often expensive, especially for vulnerable families. Without 
birth registration in Ukraine, the children born in NGCA are 
likely to face difficulties in accessing documentation required to 
prove their nationality or enroll in undergraduate and post-
graduate schools. 

Difficulties are also reported when people try to obtain official 
death certificates for inheritance and property rights. It is 
estimated that only 23 per cent of deaths in NGCA are certified 
in GCA.38
38. Protection Cluster.

 If not urgently addressed, the situation is likely to 
become more complicated considering that Donetska and 
Luhanska oblasts traditionally had the highest number of the 
elderly in Ukraine before the conflict.

Another challenge many of the 1.5 million registered IDPs 
face is their diminished voting rights. Registration of place of 
residence for IDPs is temporary, whereas the right to participate 
in local elections is granted for those who have permanent 
registration in their respective area of residence, making it 
impossible for them to take part in local elections. 

Protracted internal displacement affects millions

More than 1.5 million people have been registered by the 
Ministry of Social Policy (MoSP) as internally displaced.39
39. This figure is somewhat distorted as a number of the registered IDPs are 
displaced for registration purposes, which is due to Ukraine’s IDP policy which 
links access to social payments and pensions to their IDP registration.

 In 
the absence of notable sustained peace, much of the internal 
displacement has become protracted. As years of conflict 
pass by, the number of IDPs who intend to stay in areas of 
displacement is rising. For the first time in 2018, this number 
exceeded the number of IDPs who intend to return to their 
area of origin.40
40. IOM, National Monitoring System Report, June 2018

 Over half of the IDPs returning are over the 
age of 60, while young people tend to stay in cities in search 
of better job opportunities. At the same time, 93 per cent of 
IDPs surveyed say that even though they feel integrated in 
their new communities, they still face challenges, such as 
affordable housing, employment, discrimination and legal 
and administrative barriers.41
41. IOM National Monitoring System Report, March 2018.

 Most of the IDP population 
is less resilient and face more uncertainty in securing stable 
employment and accessing services, including housing, as 
compared to non-displaced populations.

Host locations also observed an increase in rental and food 
prices, and downward pressure on wages and employment 
opportunities. Displacement has also at times caused tension 
between IDPs and host communities, risking undermining 
social cohesion. In an effort to promote IDP inclusion in local 
communities, and finding durable solutions, the Government 
of Ukraine adopted the “State Strategy on Integration of 
Internally Displaced Persons and Implementation of Long 
Term Solutions to Internal Displacement until 2020” in 
November 2017 and its Action Plan in late 2018. These are 
aimed at securing and protecting the rights, freedoms and 
interest of IDPs and elimination of any discrimination and 
promote social cohesion. While some progress has been made 
in terms of strategic planning, long-term solutions for IDPs 
remain to be fully implemented, and there is a need for a 
stronger focus on integrating displaced communities. 



MULTI-YEAR STRATEGY: 

COLLECTIVE OUTCOMES

The UN Secretary-General’s 2016 report for the World Humanitarian Summit “One Humanity, 
Shared Responsibility” called on humanitarian, development and other relevant actors to 
‘deliver Collective Outcomes: transcend humanitarian development divides’ in response 
to the growing number of people living in fragility and the increase in humanitarian needs. 
Working towards collective outcomes offers a way for humanitarian, development and 
other actors to align efforts around clear and jointly shaped goals. The notion of Collective 
Outcomes is central to the New Way of Working (NWOW), which is designed for contexts 
where short-term humanitarian action and medium- to long-term development programming 
are required simultaneously in areas of vulnerability. The Humanitarian Country Team’s (HCT) 
decision to adopt a multi-year strategy and Collective Outcomes signals a profound change 
in the strategic direction, programming and leadership, while continuing to place the needs 
of people at the centre of the action. This multi-year strategy offers tangible opportunities for 
the approach to become a reality on the ground, capitalises on the incoming recovery and 
development endeavours and fully utilises the comparative advantages of a diverse set of 
partners to achieve greater collaboration and deliver results for the most vulnerable. 

 2. Essential services 
1. Protection & livelihoodsDevelopment(UNPF/SDGs)
Humanitarian(HRP) 
3. Critical civilian structures
1. Affected people 
have access to adequate 
protection and 
means of livelihoods

3. Affected people 
have consistent access 
to critical civilian structures


2. Affected people have 
improved access to quality 
and affordable services



Strictly prioritised humanitarian actions 

Humanitarian partners continue to deliver in eastern Ukraine, 
despite scarce resources and unpredictable access challenging 
their operations in 2018. Joint humanitarian response has 
reached over a million men, women and children in 2018 with 
critical assistance and protection services, prioritising those 
who needed them the most. 

While various persistent and newly-emerging challenges 
continue to put the capacities of humanitarians to the test, 
they serve as a positive driver of excellence, efficiency and 
innovation. All partners agreed to go through an extremely 
strict and focused prioritisation process using the HCT-
endorsed set of criteria to vet and give preference to projects 
for inclusion in the 2019 Response Plan. 

This reflects a sense of shared responsibility in ensuring that 
the 2019 humanitarian operations will effectively maximise 
the available resources and promptly target those most in 
need. The overriding imperative to save lives and alleviate 
human suffering will continue to guide humanitarian 
operations, taking into consideration Ukraine’s harsh long 
winters (from late November to March) and extremely hot 
summers that aggravate the severity of humanitarian needs.

Geographically focused response

Widespread contamination of landmines and explosive 
remnants of war (ERW), growing impact on civilians’ 
mental health and psychosocial wellbeing, consideration 
of ‘catchment’ areas of basic services for conflict-affected 
people and the increasingly protracted nature of the crisis 
prompted humanitarian partners to reconsider their strategic 
priorities. Taking into account the ‘do-no-harm’ principle, 
the prioritisation criteria were extended to beyond ‘security-
related’ consideration to ensure that people who require 
humanitarian assistance would safely receive it wherever

they are. 

This means that humanitarian assistance will be extended to 
the area within 20 kilometres on both sides of the ‘contact 
line’ ensuring that the most vulnerable will receive essential 
assistance, even though they may not be directly affected 
by shelling. This move was important as humanitarian and 
protection assistance will be delivered in relatively safer 
locations, not forcing people to move to unsafe places to 
access assistance they are entitled to.

Vulnerability priority through a ‘gender and age lens’

Being the first country in the world that applied the Inter-
Agency Standing Committee (IASC) Gender with Age Marker 
(GAM) at full scale in the 2018 planning cycle, the Ukraine 
HCT sets an example by striving to address the challenges of 
gender and age mainstreaming further in 2019 and beyond. 
The mandatory GAM was vigorously applied across the 
board to ensure that the planned response would specifically 
target meeting the critical needs of highly vulnerable people, 
including the elderly, people with disabilities, female-headed 
households, households with multiple children, IDPs, and 
other marginalised groups of people. 

The GAM also allowed humanitarian partners to examine 
the levels of accountability, protection and addresses the 
commitment of “leaving no one behind”. By applying the 
GAM to all the projects included in the 2019 response, 
Ukraine not only safeguarded the highest standard of 
effective programming, but also strived to ensure that the 
humanitarian response in 2019 would be even more gender- 
and age-sensitive and cater for the different needs of those 
highly vulnerable men, women, girls and boys.

Ukraine will also seek to promote the GAM in the monitoring 
phase to ensure that the humanitarian response will be 
adequately tailored and adapted to address the specific needs 
of men, women, girls and boys who are affected by the conflict 
in a different way. 

Accountable and principled humanitarian actions

The HCT Accountability to Affected People (AAP) framework 
is a centrepiece of the 2019 planning cycle. The HCT required 

2019-2020

RESPONSE STRATEGY

Entrenched and active armed conflict in eastern Ukraine continues to kill and injure 
thousands of civilians and put the lives and wellbeing of millions more at risk. The 
conflict’s direct and ripple effects remain severe, with 5.2 million Ukrainians affected 
- 3.5 million of whom require humanitarian assistance and protection. With almost 
five years of an increasingly protracted and complex crisis, the Humanitarian Country 
Team (HCT) has made a strategic decision to move away from a single-year planning 
cycle and adopt a multi-year strategy for 2019 and 2020, which not only aims to meet 
the humanitarian and protection needs of the most vulnerable people, but also to 
reduce these needs over time. Though protection of civilians and delivery of critical 
humanitarian assistance are the priorities for 2019, the multi-year timeline allows 
humanitarians to connect, where feasible, with recovery and development actions and 
contribute to finding long-lasting and transformative outcomes.



all projects to adhere to the AAP framework and put in 
place appropriate AAP mechanisms to actively facilitate the 
engagement of conflict-affected people in the various aspects 
of programming. This reflects the HCT’s commitment to 
ensure that human dignity and the rights of people affected by 
crisis is at the centre of its work. AAP is essential for quality 
programming. Targeted, quality and timely humanitarian 
action can only be achieved by knowing what people want 
and need as well as understanding their practices, capacities 
and coping strategies. 

As part of accountability, the HCT remains fully committed 
to promote a culture in which sexual harassment, bullying 
and any abuse of authority will never be accepted across 
the humanitarian sector – both for those in need and those 
delivering assistance. Capitalising upon the HCT Prevention 
of Sexual Exploitation and Abuse (PSEA) endorsed in 
October 2017, the HCT will accelerate its work to strengthen 
the accountability of the aid community to the affected people 
in 2019 and beyond. This also includes strengthening the 
accountability and internal justice mechanisms across the 
sector as per the shared commitment of zero-tolerance policy 
towards sexual exploitation and abuse.

Placing protection at the centre of the response

Frequent violations of International Humanitarian Law 
(IHL) underpins the HCT’s unwavering core commitment to 
promote the significance of protection in the humanitarian 
response. This means ensuring that humanitarian action 
should strive to not only meet the immediate needs of people, 
but also take steps to help people stay safe from violence, 
coercion and abuse and to restore their wellbeing and dignity.

To bring protection to the forefront, as an overarching issue 
in the humanitarian response, the 2019 planning cycle 
capitalised upon the existing HCT Protection Strategy 
which provided a systematic framework to the most urgent 
and severe protection risks. The aim of the Strategy was to 
prevent the violations of human rights and IHL and to ensure 
comprehensive system-wide efforts, including strategic 
advocacy, to alleviate the suffering of conflict-affected 
population in Ukraine, regardless of their place of residence.

This also translates into the HCT’s strategic approach of 
impartial and neutral engagement with parties to the conflict, 
which is essential not only to maintain the required levels 
of presence to deliver timely and principled humanitarian 
action for those in need, but also seek to uphold their rights 
and dignity independently of political and security actors and 
agendas. 

Cash – a dignified modality of assistance 

Cash-based assistance (including voucher) has proven a fast, 
efficient and dignified way of delivering humanitarian aid as 
alternative of or complementary to in-kind assistance, where 
feasible. Not only does it give decision-making power back 
to the beneficiaries, it also facilitates local economic recovery 
and growth. Multiple evidence has shown that the cash and 
voucher system is the appropriate modality of response in 
Ukraine, particularly in GCA, where markets remain open, 
and banking and postal services offer a safe and efficient 
delivery mechanisms. 

In Ukraine, the use of cash has progressively been on the 
rise over the past few years. Almost 45 per cent of projects 
included in the 2019 response plan have a cash or voucher 
component, compared to less than 40 per cent last year. For 
three years in a row, the response plans embed a clear set 
of cash-specific indicators which allows for a measurable 
achievement of cash-based assistance throughout the cycle. 

Multi-purpose cash (MPC) continues to be an important 
multi-sectoral response modality. Its primary objective is to 
bridge the income gaps of the most vulnerable individuals and 
enable them to meet their basic needs as per the minimum 
expenditure (set and regularly reviewed by the Ministry 
of Social Policy). The cash system also reduces the use of 
negative coping mechanisms. MPC specifically targets the 
most vulnerable individuals whose monthly income is lower 
than the minimum expenditure. This includes the elderly, 
whose sole source of income is pension, female-headed 
households with multiple children, people with disabilities 
whose social benefits are not enough for them to get by, 
and IDPs who may lose access to their pensions due to 
bureaucratic complications. In case of extreme or chronic 
vulnerabilities, they will be referred to projects with in-kind 
modalities and/or for appropriate protection or sectoral 
assistance as supplementary or additional types of assistance 
in the future. 

An active Cash Working Group in Ukraine offers a platform 
where agencies implementing MPC activities collaborate 
on the basis of shared standards– both strategically and 
operationally- and principles, including the review of the 
Minimum Expenditure Basket (MEB) informing the MPC 
transfer value, harmonised post-distribution monitoring and 
information sharing.

Response strategy adjustable to changes in context

Having a multi-year response strategy does not mean static 
programming. On the contrary, the HCT made a decision 
to have, for the first time, project proposals reviewed and 
updated on a regular basis (every six months) and allow the 
submission of new project proposals, if needed. This will 
keep the response plan ‘alive’, operational, responsive and 
adjustable to any changes in the context. It will also include 
the adjustment of financial requirements throughout the year, 
depending on the situation. This approach aims to ensure 
that the estimation of resources needed will be as realistic 
as possible to meet humanitarian needs, should they rapidly 
increase or decrease.

Finding solutions for protracted internal displacement

Well into its fifth year, the conflict in eastern Ukraine has 
uprooted tens of thousands of families looking for safety, 
better access to services or employment opportunities, just to 
name a few. The need to be registered and verified as IDP to 
access basic services has forced a number of conflict-affected 
people, particularly those residing in NGCA, to register as 
IDP, even though they are not necessarily physically displaced. 
In 2018, the Ministry of Social Policy registered 1.5 million 
IDPs, most of which are in a protracted internal displacement. 

The Government of Ukraine adopted the “State Strategy 
on Integration of Internally Displaced Persons and 

PART I: 2019-2020 RESPONSE STRATEGY 



16



Implementation on Long Term Solutions to Internal 
Displacement until 2020” in November 2017 and endorsed 
the action plan a year later. This strategy is an important 
step towards addressing internal displacement in Ukraine 
and preventing it from becoming protracted. Humanitarians 
will continue to support the Government of Ukraine to 
implement practical ways to address the needs of IDPs, both 
through immediate humanitarian response as well as long-
term interventions as part of the HCT’s endeavour on the 
Humanitarian-Development Nexus (HDN).

Coordinated response to improve effectiveness and 
efficiency

A field-oriented humanitarian coordination structure will 
provide an excellent ground for the HCT to strengthen 
coordination across both sides of the ‘contact line’. In NGCA 
where humanitarian needs remain critical, the HCT will 
continue to use various modalities in an impartial and neutral 
manner to access the people in need with assistance and 
protection services. 

The Area Humanitarian Coordination Group (AHCG) 
will continue to play a pivotal role in supporting the HC in 
engaging with the de facto entities to simplify bureaucratic 
requirements for aid workers and maintain and increase 
humanitarian access in the coming years. Although 
unpredictability remains, it is critical to keep the positive 
momentum from 2018, capitalise on it to build on the trust 
gained and demonstrate the value of humanitarian activities in 
support of the population.

The well-established Civil-Military Coordination (CMCoord) 
mechanism will continue to play a critical role in facilitating 
and maintaining humanitarian access to areas closest to the 
‘contact line’ to allow humanitarian partners to carry out 
and monitor their activities safely and independently. The 
CMCoord mechanism is well accepted by both civil and 
military authorities as well as the conflict-affected population 
receiving support. In 2018, there have been over 2,200 
successful humanitarian notifications received through the 
CMCoord.

Enhanced and coordinated communications and 
media outreach

The humanitarian community has recognised that as the 
conflict continues unabated, it has become increasingly 
important to convey the complexity of the humanitarian 
crisis in eastern Ukraine and bring the voices of the affected 
people to the forefront. Since 2018, the Humanitarian 
Communications Sub-Group (HCGS) has supported 
the HCT to scale up its advocacy, public outreach and 
communications efforts to put Ukraine back on the 
international agenda. Coordinated communication strategies 
and plans were agreed and implemented by all humanitarian 
partners. This has helped generate positive attention with 
#UkraineNotForgotten hashtag trending worldwide, 
and other important high-level events and active media 
engagement on Ukraine successfully implemented.

In 2019, the HCT will continue to build upon these 
achievements and further strengthen the coordinated 
advocacy, public outreach and communications efforts. A 
Communications Strategy will be agreed and implemented 
to support the MYHRP and boost the level of attention at 
national and international levels through regular social media 
and media engagement, production of joint audio-visual 
material, human interest stories, joint campaigns and high-
level events. The strategy will also support the ongoing efforts 
around advocacy, wherever necessary, and put a human face 
to the crisis by making the voices of the people heard. 

PART I: 2019-2020 RESPONSE STRATEGY 

HUMANITARIAN COORDINATION ARCHITECTURE

Humanitarian Country TeamHCT + Donors(quarterly)
Inter-Cluster Coordination 
GroupLogistics Sectoral Working Group 
Information Management 
Working GroupUKRAINE -2019 Humanitarian Coordination Architecture 
Civil-Military Coordination 
mechanismArea-based Humanitarian 
Coordination GroupFood Security & 
LivelihoodsHealth & 
NutritionProtectionShelter/NFIMental Health & 
Psychosocial Support 
TWGMine ActionSub-ClusterGender-Based ViolenceSub-ClusterChild ProtectionSub-ClusterHousing, Land 
and Property 
TWGAge and 
Disability TWGHumanitarian Communications 
Sub-GroupInformation-sharing mechanismsGeneral Coordination Meeting 
Cash Working GroupAgriculture 
TWGWASH & UtilitiesEducationPrevention of Sexual Exploitation 
and Abuse (PSEA) TaskforceDonetskKramatorskKyivSievierodonetskMariupolLuhanskHumanitarian Coordinator
17



Planning assumptions

The humanitarian response planning for 2019 is underpinned 
by a set of agreed assumptions, which suggest that active 
hostilities will continue albeit with fluctuating dynamics, 
especially in hotspots in the areas closest to the ever-
shifting ‘contact line’. The crossings of the ‘contact line’ 
through five official checkpoints has steadily increased 
year by year. Compared to 2017, 2018 saw a 15 per cent 
increase in individual crossings, which is an average of 1.1 
million crossings every month. Looking at the staggering 
unemployment figures, it is unlikely for the economic 
situation of the two conflict-affected oblasts to improve.42
42. There are a number of early recovery and developments projects which 
are being implemented in the GCAs, including by the national and local Government 
authorities, as well as recovery and development partners.



The conflict is likely to continue putting relentless pressure 
on infrastructure and service provision in and near the 
conflict-affected areas. The ‘contact line’ has shattered the 
social, market, service provision and economic networks that 
previously connected the civilian populations on both sides of 
the ‘contact line’. The lives of millions of people living in the 
two oblasts have had to be re-organised, placing additional 
burden on already over-stretched services such as health, 
education, water, heating and employment. 

Whilst more people in need could be reached in 2018, 
access in NGCA remains highly unpredictable and severely 
restricted. Persistent underfunding continues to put pressure 
on and limit the capacity of humanitarian operations to reach 
the people in need. Finally, the political landscape remains 
unpredictable due to the upcoming elections in 2019.



SUPPORTING 

HUMANITARIAN 
DEVELOPMENT NEXUS

Responding to a humanitarian crisis like in eastern Ukraine raises complex issues 
for all parties involved, including responders, policy specialists and policy makers. 
These issues affect people in need in different ways depending on their vulnerability 
and capacity to cope. Resilience of the affected population as well as the level of 
support they receive determine how quickly they recover. In order to respond timely, 
effectively and responsibly, the humanitarian community seeks to engage with all 
partners and to localise the response. 

In an inreasigly protracted protection crisis, like the one in 
eastern Ukraine, the humanitarian response needs more 
durable solutions requiring a longer planning lens. Hence, 
this multi-year strategy embraces the Humanitarian-
Development Nexus (HDN) which aims at building the 
synergies on humanitarian and development partners. 
Adopting this strategy is the only way to take advantage of the 
many opportunities associated with implementing long-term 
projects. Ukraine has made progress in adopting the New Way 
of Working (NWoW) approach as a step forward to achieving 
tangible results in working across sectors and reduce the 
humanitarian-development divide by setting Collective 
Outcomes (COs) and relevant structures. Under this plan, 
the humanitarian community in Ukraine strives to establish 
a platform of activities that seek better collaboration across 
institutional boundaries and the capitalisation on comparative 
advantages, as appropriate. It aspires to advocate efforts 
on issues that cannot be solved by either humanitarian or 
development partners but require political action. Such efforts 
are expected to reduce the overall level of vulnerability and 
need for humanitarian interventions in the long term.

The long-term effects of disrupted basic services are often 
the root cause of the deteriorating humanitarian situation in 
eastern Ukraine. Hence, the international community under 
the strong leadership of the Resident and Humanitarian 
Coordinator (RC/HC) has made significant progress in 
adopting the NWoW which ensures a people-centred 
approach, fosters closer partnerships and better aligns the 
planning of international actors in Ukraine. At the beginning 
of 2018, the RC/HC established the HCT Working Group on 
the Humanitarian-Development Nexus (HCT HDN working 
group) with co-chairing arrangements that reflect the global 
setup with the Under-Secretary General for Humanitarian 

PART I: SUPPORTING HUMANITARIAN DEVELOPMENT NEXUS

19


Credit: OCHA Ukraine/2018/Valijon Ranoev 



Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator and Administrator 
of UNDP. The group has developed the HDN Concept 
Note spelling out the strategic and operational ‘two track’ 
approach vision which aims to help all actors involved better 
understand the HDN. The work of the group is built on the 
experience and good practice examples from other contexts in 
the world. 

Following the HDN workshop that gathered the knowledge 
from Somalia, Pakistan, Colombia and Uganda as well 
as the vision of HQ and the international expertise, the 
humanitarian community drafted three Collective Outcomes 
(COs) capturing the most burning needs of the population. 
It was agreed to adopt these three COs as the Strategic 
Objectives for the two-year plan, aiming to contribute to the 
positive shift in the situation as well as address protracted 
displacement. Development agencies discussed to link 
activities under the United Nations Partnership Framework 
(UNPF) to achieve these COs at the Joint Planning Workshop, 
which was also attended by the cluster coordinators who 
provided expertise and humanitarian perspective into the 
process.

The multi-year strategy also embraces the humanitarian 
community’s goal to expand local action, ownership and 
partnerships by recognising the critical role national and 
local responders play in providing humanitarian assistance 
and protection services. All localisation efforts within 
the humanitarian coordination system will continue and 
build on the achievements made to date. This multi-year 
strategy provides a vehicle to support and complement 
national coordination mechanisms, where they exist. The 
Humanitarian Country Team (HCT), cluster coordinators 
and OCHA seek to identify barriers to participation in 
coordination and to better include local and national 
responders in international coordination mechanisms. 

The humanitarian community aims to leverage the 
opportunity to operate in a two-year planning cycle to 
enhance the impact and efficiency of its humanitarian action 
by improving the coordination at all levels, encouraging 
partnerships and eliminating the duplication of interventions. 
The clusters also strive to maximise opportunities for multi-
sector and inter-cluster linkages; improve the evidence-base 
for humanitarian needs and interventions; collect information 
on the impact of gender and age-based vulnerabilities; 
improve sustainability, impact and cost-effectiveness; work to 
change beneficiary’s behaviours that increase vulnerability; 
and pursue the increased effectiveness of humanitarian 
advocacy and diplomacy. 



In Ukraine, the adoption of a multi-year planning horizon 
(2019-2020) and the strategic shift to the notion of Collective 
Outcomes (COs) central to the Humanitarian-Development 
Nexus (HDN) present the HCT with an opportunity to design 
a new and pragmatic way of working that will bring together 
short-term humanitarian action and medium- to long-
term development programming. This is critically relevant, 
particularly in a protracted situation like the one in eastern 
Ukraine where humanitarian, recovery and development 
needs to exist side by side. 

Collective Outcomes facilitate joined-up and complementary 
actions of both development and humanitarian actors, 
including in response and needs monitoring, to ensure 
that the interventions not only meet the urgent needs of 
the targeted populations, but also reduce their risks and 
vulnerabilities over time and change the status quo.

Information Management (IM) is a cornerstone of the 
response. Its functions cut across the various realms of the 
operations while threading them together for developing 
one common operational picture essential for decision 
making, be it humanitarian, recovery or development. 
However, the artificial divide between humanitarian and 
development often means uneven access to various sets 
of critical data. Humanitarian actors often have access to 
data the development community does not and vice versa. 
The existence of comprehensive but separate IM systems 
within the humanitarian and development communities 
has inhibited the creation of a common operational picture 
which restricts the ability of decision makers, including the 
UN Resident and Humanitarian Coordinator (RC/HC) to 
access and use relevant information for developing strategies, 
operational planning and results monitoring. 

The collaboration of IM capacities of the humanitarian and 
development sectors was a result of the 2018 annual review 
of the coordination architecture, which also considered the 
challenges of the ‘data intensive’ context of urban response in 
Ukraine, the existing well-defined humanitarian monitoring 
mechanisms and HDN opportunities prioritised by the HCT. 
It will serve as an essential base to enhance complementarities 
across actors and facilitate quality and timely coordination 
as well as evidence-based HDN programming. In practice, 
this will create common tools or structures for sharing and 
managing information across HDN giving a better overall 
picture of where resources need to be prioritised and where 
synergies and gaps exist. All this can be achieved by using 
limited resources more effectively.

A first step in this direction is the joint effort of the Resident 
Coordinator Office (RCO) and OCHA in close collaboration 
with the Inter-Cluster Coordination Group (ICCG) and 
the Information Management Working Group (IMWG) 
to streamline the sharing and mapping of humanitarian, 
recovery and development data. This is done through a 
harmonised reporting structure that contributes to the 
existing data platform on Peacebuilding and Recovery 
(http://portal.mtot.gov.ua/) administered by the Ministry of 
Temporarily Occupied Territories and IDPs (MTOT) with 
support of the World Bank. The data platform serves as a 
coordination tool to help map and monitor national and 
international programming and progress on peacebuilding, 
recovery, development and humanitarian actions.

PART I: RESPONSE MONITORING INNOVATIVE AND COMPLEMENTARY MONITORING MECHANISMS 



RESPONSE MONITORING 

INNOVATIVE AND 
COMPLEMENTARY 
MONITORING 
MECHANISMS 

Recognised as an integral part of delivery of humanitarian assistance, regular 
and scheduled response monitoring helps keep one’s finger on the pulse of the 
situation. It is of utmost importance for a multi-year plan to have in-built robust 
and innovative mechanisms that will not only inform programmatic and funding 
adjustments as necessary, but also improve accountability for the response, 
both to affected people as well as to other stakeholders, including donors. 

21



While a proven methodology for multi-year response 
monitoring is not yet available at the global level, such a lack 
thereof on the other hand presents an opportunity for actors 
in Ukraine to experiment and innovate contextualised and 
practical mechanisms that will contribute to nascent global 
efforts to pilot multi-year strategic response monitoring 
and impact evaluation. The 2019 humanitarian operations 
will be monitored and measured against cluster objectives 
and activity levels by means of data based on the agreed, 
predefined indicators, targets and timeline (please refer to 
Part III: Annex for more information). A broader collective 
outcome-level monitoring framework will be developed to 
inform about the evolution of the situation and needs over 
time; how humanitarian action contributes to reducing 
needs, risks and vulnerabilities; and about the collective 
achievements of all actors towards the COs. 

This is already work in progress across humanitarian, 
recovery and development sectors, capitalising upon other 
ongoing joint planning processes, such as the United 
Nations Partnership Framework’s 2019 Joint Work Planning, 
applicable to the GCA. Clusters and partners will continue 
to facilitate response monitoring in NGCA using a remote 
monitoring mechanism and project progress reports from 
implementing partners as well as available communication 
technologies such as primary monitoring tools. 

It is expected that innovation around the multi-year 
monitoring of the 2019-2020 Ukraine strategy will present 
new challenges despite the experience of partners and clusters 
in Ukraine. Therefore, liaison with operational agencies 
at the local, regional and global levels will be continued 
to identify resources and capabilities for monitoring and 
impact evaluation and to share and learn from other 
countries’ emerging experiences. In line with the Grand 
Bargain commitment to ‘harmonise and simplify reporting 
requirements’, existing or emerging global tools or platforms, 
including the Response Planning Module (RPM, https://plan.
hpc.tools), the upgraded Financial Tracking Service (FTS, 
https://fts.unocha.org), the Digital Situation Report (https://
reports.unocha.org/country/ukraine/), the UNInfo (http://
uninfo.org ) and the data platform maintained by the MTOT, 
will be capitalised upon to serve the collective purpose, where 
feasible. 

PART I: RESPONSE MONITORING INNOVATIVE AND COMPLEMENTARY MONITORING MECHANISMS 

JANDECOCTAUGJULJUNMAYAPRMARFEBJANSEPNOVHumanitarian Bulletin(Digital Situation Report)
Humanitarian SnapshotHumanitarian DashboardHumanitarian Needs OverviewHRP project revision & new 
submission20192020
22



The protracted humanitarian crisis has resulted in access to services continuously disrupted, has had a severe and long-term 
psychological effect on those impacted, and will continue to affect millions more. Though humanitarian access to people in need 
was at times unpredictable, constrained and was exacerbated by the lack of funds (the 2018 HRP was 38% funded) they were 
able to provide assistance and protection services in hard-to-reach areas. For 2019, the clusters have identified critical funding 
needs to highlight where funding is needed most. Also, winterisation needs require a long lead time for which timely funding 
to these efforts is required. In order to scale-up response efforts US$162 million is needed in 2019.

PART I: RESOURCE MOBILISATION 

RESOURCE 

MOBILISATION 

Whilst donors continue to provide generous support, the 2018 Ukraine Humanitarian 
Response Plan (HRP) was underfunded posing a huge challenge for the humanitarian 
community to bring vital humanitarian assistance and protection services to people 
in need in eastern Ukraine. Despite the challenges, tireless efforts of humanitarian 
workers to respond to the needs of the most vulnerable continued. More than 1.1 
million people received essential humanitarian assistance and protection services 
in 2018, including through the rapid scaling up of humanitarian operations which 
was made possible with a CERF allocation of US$6 million. This demonstrates 
that tangible results can be achieved when funding is made available to bring 
hope and dignity to the lives of men, women and children in eastern Ukraine. 

23

Contributing to the 
Humanitarian Response 
PlanDonors who wish to contribute to the 
Humanitarian Response Plan; donate directly to 
organisations participating in the plan; or need 
more information material, such as the Humanitarian 
Needs Overview and other in-depth monitoring reports 
should visit: 
In kind relief aidDonors who are unable to contribute to the 
United Nations’ much needed cash funds have 
the possibility to make in-kind donations, which 
are also very much appreciated. For in-kind contribu-
tions in response to disasters and emergencies, please 
contact: 
Donating through the 
Central Emergency 
Response Fund (CERF)
The CERF provides rapid initial funding for 
life-saving actions at the onset of emergencies 
and for poorly funded essential humanitarian 
operations in protracted crises. The CERF 
receives contributions from various donors, 
mainly governments but also private companies, 
foundations, charities and individuals, which are 
combined into a single fund. These essential 
funds are used for crises around the world. Find 
out more about the CERF and how to donate: 
www.humanitarianresponse.info/

operations/ukraine

logik@un.org

https://cerf.un.org/donate



PART II: 2019 OPERATIONS

Summary of needs, targets & requirements 25

Operational capacity......................................... 26

Humanitarian access ....................................... 27

Protection ........................................................... 28

Food security and livelihoods .......................... 32

Health and nutrition .......................................... 35

Water, sanitation and hygiene ......................... 38

Shelter/NFI ......................................................... 41

Education ............................................................ 44

Common services

and support ...................................................... 47



Humanitarian actors in Ukraine propose to complement the 
Government-led response and other actors’ humanitarian 
interventions with a lean, focused and highly prioritised 
response plan totalling US$162 million to assist 2.3 million 
people most in need of assistance in 2019. Of this, US$135 
million has been identified as critical priority requirement 
calling for early funding, which is essential for the timely 
delivery of multi-sectoral assistance for the most vulnerable as 
well as meeting key benchmarks, especially winterisation and 
other season-sensitive efforts. 

In line with the HCT’s Strategic Priorities, an estimated 32 
per cent of the funding requirements specifically aim to 
facilitate the delivery of critical humanitarian assistance and 
protection services for vulnerable people in NGCA who have 
experienced socio-economic disconnect and isolation over 
the years. This response is essential to help them access basic 
goods and services as well as protection assistance. 

For the second year in a row, the funding requirements of the 
response plan are greater for non-governmental organisations 
(NGOs) than for UN agencies. This reflects a recognition of 
the important role NGOs, particularly national ones, and civil 
society organisations play as front-line actors in accessing 
difficult-to-reach areas and providing critical assistance to the 
most vulnerable.

While at 2.3 million people, the number of people targeted 
by the 2019 Response Plan remains unchanged from 2018, 
its total funding requirement for the first round of approved 
projects has decreased by 15 per cent compared to 2018. 
This is mainly due to lower number of targeted people and 
corresponding financial requirements of three clusters – 
namely Food Security & Livelihoods, Education and Shelter/
Non-Food Items (NFIs). The Health and Nutrition Cluster 
also requires slightly less funds than in 2018.

SUMMARY OF

NEEDS, TARGETS & 
REQUIREMENTS 

PEOPLE IN NEED

3.5M

PEOPLE TARGETED

2.3M

REQUIREMENTS (US$)

162M

CRITICAL REQUIREMENTS (US$)

135M

1.3M80K2.0M1.3M0.1M0.2M- 
31K1. MPC is not a Cluster, but a modality for assistance. Arrangements in place will be regularly reviewed according to further guidance by global IASC discussions. An active Cash Working Group, currently operational at the field level 
under the technical leadership of ACTED offers a platform where agencies implementing MPC activities collaborate on the basis of shared standard and principles-- both strategically and operationally. It has a linkage with the Inter-ClusterCoordination Group (ICCG). 
64%
55%
54%
40%
52%
53% 
3.1M1.1M3.2M1.3M0.3M0.7M 
- 
- 
20| 64|16%
21| 54| 25%
14| 59 | 27%
20| 50 | 30%
15 | 42 | 43%
79 | 21 | 0% 
41.7M11.2M20.8M17.3M26.6M6.5M4.5M 
6.5M47.6M19.2M31.8M18.1M27.0M6.5M5.0M6.5M3.5M 1.3M 0.2M 0.4M 0.4M* 2.3M$162M54%15| 59 | 26%$135MNGCA% femaleCritical(US$) 
Total(US$) 
% children, 
adults, 
elderly**
BREAKDOWN OF PEOPLE TARGETEDTOTALBY SEX & AGEREQUIREMENTSPeopletargetedPeople in needTotal***
0.3M 
26K 
1.3M 
0.6M61K 
0.1M 
- 
2K* This figure includes 0.3m IDPs in GGA beyond the 20 km area along the ‘contact line’ .
** Children (<18 years old), adult (18-59 years), elderly (60+ years)
*** Total figure is not the total of the column, as the same people may appear several times.
ProtectionFood Security &
LivelihoodsWASHHealth & NutritionShelterEducationCommon Services & 
SupportMultipurpose 
Cash Assistance1(0-5 km area along 
the ‘contact line’)
(Excluding the 20 km 
area along 
the ‘contact line’)
(5-20 km area along 
the ‘contact line’)
GCA0.6M23K0.2M0.2M29K15K-
21K17K0.3M0.2M27K27K-
9K13K0.2M0.2M13K18K-
00.4M

OPERATIONAL

CAPACITY

Based on the consolidated 2018 3W (Who, What, Where) database, the number of 
organisations providing humanitarian assistance and protection to conflict-affected people 
in Ukraine and engaged in the collective coordination structures has decreased from 181 
in 2017 to 138 in 2018. Out of this, a total of 43 organisations are seeking funding for the 
implementation of 97 projects in 2019 through the MYHRP.

The decrease is mainly due to the consolidation 
of the humanitarian operations, which has been 
more focused on the two conflict-affected oblasts. 
However, attention also remains in response to 
pockets of critical humanitarian needs in the rest 
of the GCA, particularly as a result of protracted 
internal displacement. 

Based on the consolidated 2018 3W database to 
which the Clusters contribute through a monthly 
update, the consolidation of the humanitarian 
operations has been observed in Kharkivska and 
Dnipropetrovsk oblasts, as well as other western 
and southern oblasts of Ukraine. While this reflects 
the HCT’s strategic geographical priority, those 
organisations not reported in the monthly 3W by 
the clusters or not engaged in the humanitarian 
coordination architecture are not necessarily 
inactive in the delivery of humanitarian assistance 
and protection. 

While the geographical focus of the humanitarian 
response over the past years has been on the two 
most conflict-affected oblasts of eastern Ukraine, 
the access of humanitarian actors to people in 
need, particularly in NGCA, remains limited, 
conditional and unpredictable due to administrative 
impediments and insecurity. NGOs, particularly 
national ones, and civil society organisations 
continue to play an important role as front-line 
actors in accessing areas of critical needs and 
providing humanitarian assistance and protection 
to the most vulnerable. Efforts to strengthen their 
roles will remain a priority for 2019 and beyond.

8231243# of HRP partners
INGOINGONNGOUN
10783785138
NNGO
OtherInt orgUN 
# of partnersPROTECTION92 
partnersFOOD SECURITY ANDLIVELIHOODS22 
partnersWASHSHELTER/NFI14 
partners21partnersHEALTH AND 
NUTRITION39 
partnersEDUCATION19partners

July 2015 saw the introduction of serious restrictions for 
all humanitarian organisations operating in NGCA. Whilst 
humanitarians continued to do their best to deliver aid to 
the most vulnerable people on both sides of the ‘contact 
line’, these restrictions seriously hampered efforts to upscale 
the response. Access slightly improved in 2018, allowing 
humanitarians to reach more people in need, which was also 
enabled by the CERF allocation of US$6 million. 

The situation, however, remains unpredictable, and 
the Humanitarian Coordinator, the HCT, OCHA, and 
humanitarian partners will continue to advocate for safe and 
sustained access for principled humanitarian operations as 
well as facilitate regular coordination, including with civilian 
and military actors, at national and subnational levels. 

In May 2018, the Joint Forces Operation (JFO) replaced the 
Anti-Terrorist Operation (ATO), the transition of which did 
not affect humanitarian activities. This smooth changeover 
process was mainly due to CMCoord’s effective coordination 
role as well as regular interaction with the JFO, which is 
reflected in the over 2,200 humanitarian movement missions 
and cargo notifications facilitated in 2018. This also allowed 
for more than 35 convoys to deliver humanitarian assistance 
(facilitated by the joint UNHCR-OCHA Logistics Working 
Group) to both sides of the ‘contact line’ in 2018. 

However, significant challenges remain. That there are 
only five checkpoints through which civilians can cross 
the 427-km-long ‘contact line’ is a further stumbling block. 
In the case of Luhanska oblast, there is only one single 
pedestrian bridge that connects GCA and NGCA. The lack 
of paved roads or sometimes even the complete absence of 
drivable roads is yet another hurdle for humanitarian access, 
including the risk of land mines and unexploded ordnance 
for civilians and aid workers. 

The humanitarian community will continue to advocate for 
sustained humanitarian access for affected people to goods 
and services, and for humanitarian actors to reach the people 
in need. It will further promote full respect for International 
Humanitarian Law as well as for the Humanitarian 
Principles. This includes freedom of movement for civilians 
between GCA and NGCA, restoration of commercial traffic 
across the ‘contact line’, resumption of banking services and 
payment of social entitlements. 

HUMANITARIAN

ACCESS

Access for humanitarian actors to the people in need as well as for conflict-affected 
civilians to life-saving goods and services remains a challenge in eastern Ukraine. 
Continuous shelling, threat of landmines and unexploded remnants of war (UXOs), 
logistic hurdles, and limited number of crossing points as well as bureaucratic barriers 
continue to hamper the delivery of humanitarian assistance and protection services.

MiloveStarobilskMarkivkaNovoaidarIziumBorovaKupianskLutuhyneSorokyneSlovianoserbskStanytsia 
LuhanskaNovopskovBilokurakyneKreminnaBilovodskPerevalskAntratsytDvorichnaSvatoveDovzhanskAmvrosiivkaYasynuvataMarinkaBoikivskeSlovianskStarobesheveManhushLymanShakhtarskNovoazovskNikolskeBakhmutKostiantynivkaPopasnaDonetskLuhanskSEA OFAZOVKyivMaiorsk(EECP)
Stanytsia Luhanska(EECP)
Novotroitske(EECP)
Marinka(EECP)
Hnutove(EECP)
DONETSKALUHANSKAKHARKIVSKALegendEntry/Exit Checkpoint'Contact line' as of August 2018 
Non-Government Controlled Area 
Area of active hostilitiesThe boundaries and names shown and the designations used on this map do not imply official 
endorsement or acceptance by the United Nations. Security incident data is provided by INSO. 

PROTECTION

PEOPLE IN NEEDPEOPLE TARGETED# OF PROJECTSREQUIREMENTS (US$)# OF PARTNERS3347.6M283.1M1.3M
PROTECTION OBJECTIVE 2

2People of concern benefit from full and 
non-discriminatory access to quality essential 
services and enjoyment of their rights with 
particular attention to the most vulnerable. 

RELATES TO CO2 

PROTECTION OBJECTIVE 1

1 Protection for people of concern is 
strengthened, including prevention and 
mitigation of rights’ violations. 
RELATES TO CO1 

PROTECTION OBJECTIVE 3

3Social cohesion and resilience of conflict-
affected people is improved and IDPs are 
supported in identifying durable solutions. 

RELATES TO CO2 ,CO3 

Cluster multi-year strategy

The aim of the Protection Cluster is to strengthen protection for displaced and conflict-affected people, by coordinating 
protection advocacy and operational response; ensuring full and non-discriminatory access to quality essential services 
and enjoyment of rights and promote respect for IHL and International Human Rights Law . Particular focus will be put on 
strengthening community-based initiatives and supporting government-led services in the field of child protection, Gender-
Based Violence (GBV) prevention and response, mine action, housing, land and property rights, and providing support 
to older people and people with disabilities. 

Response approach

The Protection Cluster will support the 
coordination of protection advocacy, provision 
of protection services, protection monitoring, 
and documenting human rights violations. 
In the area up to five kilometres within the 
‘contact line’, where it can be challenging to 
establish safe and sustainable provision of 
services, partners will focus on life-saving 
activities, including through mobile teams. 
They will provide assistance to GBV survivors, 
psychosocial support to children, families and 
the elderly, protection referrals, protection 
and human rights monitoring, individual 
protection assistance, as well as marking areas 
contaminated with mines and ERWs and mine 
risk education activities. In the area up to 20 
kilometres within the ‘contact line’, protection 
partners will undertake protection assistance 
which is not always possible in the area of five 
kilometres within the ‘contact line’, such as 
facilitating child-friendly spaces, supporting 
shelters for GBV survivors, and undertaking 
mine clearance operations. 

Protection response in NGCA mainly focuses 
on counselling and community-support 
initiatives. Partners unable to operate in NGCA 
will continue to strengthen their outreach to 
residents of NGCA through hotlines providing 
legal counselling, psychosocial support and 
referrals for specific types of protection 
assistance. Information on available services 
and assistance programmes, including mine 
risk education, will also be provided at 
checkpoints, which see over 36,000 crossings 
each day. In areas with a high concentration of 
IDPs outside the 20-kilometre of the ‘contact 
line’, protection and human rights monitoring, 
referral to GBV and child protection services 
and legal assistance will be provided. This is to 
ensure equal and non-discriminatory access 
to services, with a focus on IDPs with specific 
needs, older people, people with disabilities, 
children and their families as well as GBV 
survivors. Community-support initiatives 
and peaceful coexistence projects will be 
implemented to support IDPs and conflict-

2019 REQUIREMENT(US$)

41.7M CRITICALREQUIREMENT47.6MTOTAL 
REQUIREMENT
CONTACT

Anna Rich

Protection Cluster 
Coordinator, UNHCR

rich@unhcr.org

Kateryna Martynenko

Child Protection Sub Cluster 
Coordinator, UNICEF

kmartynenko@unicef.org

Olena Kochemyrovska

GBV Sub Cluster 
Coordinator, UNFPA

kochemyrovska@unfpa.org 

Martin Oubrecht

Mine Action Sub Cluster, 
UNDP

martin.oubrecht@undp.org

55%
64%
15 | 56 | 29%
21 | 63 | 16%
PEOPLE IN NEED 
PEOPLE TARGETED
BY GEOGRAPHICAL PRIORITY 
0.3M0.6M*0.4M**
1.9M0.8M0.4M% female% children, 
adults, 
the elderly***
BY SEX & AGENGCA* Including 0.2M IDPs in 0-20 km GCA area along the ‘contact line’
** Including 0.3M IDPs in GCA (Excluding the 20 km area along ‘contact line’)
***Children (<18 years old), adults (18-59 years), elderly (60+ years)
(0-5 km area along the 
‘contact line’) 
(5-20 km area along the 
‘contact line’) 
(Excluding the 20 km 
area along 
‘contact line’)
GCAGCAGCA$5.9M
.



affected communities in achieving durable solutions and 
strengthen resilience, participation, and social cohesion.

Mainstreaming of cross-cutting issues

To ensure the centrality of protection in humanitarian 
response, the Protection Cluster will provide training on 
protection mainstreaming to humanitarian and development 
actors as well as national service providers. The Protection 
Cluster will work with partners conducting capacity-building 
activities on different aspects of humanitarian response for 
local and national authorities to help integrate accountability 
to the affected population. The Child Protection Sub-Cluster 
will organise a series of capacity building activities to support 
cluster members on localisation. The GBV Sub-Cluster 
will continue to mainstream zero tolerance to GBV in all 
humanitarian interventions and among partners as well as 
gender sensitivity, survivor-centred and human right-based 
approaches. 

Particular attention will be given to vulnerable women, girls, 
men and boys of different ages; engagement by men is also 
part of zero-tolerance mainstreaming. The Age and Disability 
Technical Working Group will conduct training on Minimum 
Standards for Age and Disability Inclusion into humanitarian 
action. The Housing, Land and Property Rights Technical 
Working Group will continue to focus on documentation, 
strengthening mechanisms for compensation for damaged 
property and military use of civilian property. 

In close co-ordination with local authorities, Mine Action 
Sub-Cluster partners will continue to provide mine risk 
education and prioritise mine action activities according to 
the needs of the population in close co-ordination with local 
authorities. The new legislation on Mine Action enables the 
creation of nationally driven victim assistance mechanisms 
where Mine Action Sub-Cluster partners will play an 
important role.

Protection Cluster partners have taken steps to include 
mechanisms to ensure accountability to the affected 
population (AAP), by establishing complaints mechanisms, 
toll-free hotlines and engaging affected communities in 
needs assessment, design of activities and feedback on 
implementation. The Protection Cluster will organise 
trainings for local partners to ensure effective operation of 
established AAP mechanisms. 

Protection Cluster partners will contribute to building 
community resilience by providing their services through 
existing community centres and engaging staff in capacity-
building activities, as well as identifying and training 
members of the community to deliver services to youth and 
older people. Community-support initiatives will mobilise 
and empower communities in order to strengthen their 
capacity to respond to protection concerns and identify 
durable solutions. 

Mine Action Sub-Cluster partners are supporting national 
ownership and leadership of mine clearance activities at the 
central and local level. At the community level, de-mining 
experts are recruited and trained from conflict-affected areas, 
which helps build resilience of the communities by providing 
employment opportunities in areas where livelihood 
opportunities are scarce. Mine Action Sub-Cluster partners 
will improve gender in the sector by recruiting and training 
more female de-miners.

Effective GBV response requires coordinated intervention 
of multiple sectors. Strengthening linkages between GBV 
Sub-Cluster, Health Cluster, Child Protection Sub-Cluster, 
Age and Disability Technical Working Group, Mental Health 
and Psychosocial Support Working Group, as well as non-
humanitarian partners is essential to ensure that accessible, 
affordable and appropriate services for GBV survivors are in 
place. Ensuring a ‘do-no-harm’ approach is at the core of GBV 
multi-sector response and priority will be given to ensuring 
safety and confidentiality.

Greater efficiencies over a multi-year period 

The Protection Cluster will ensure improved efficiencies over 
the multi-year period in protection response activities by 
promoting partnerships and increased involvement of civil 
society and authorities. The MYHRP allows longer-term 
planning of protection interventions. Adoption of national 
Mine Action legislation and National Mine Action Standards 
will allow humanitarian actors to scale-up capacity building 
activities and humanitarian de-mining under national 
coordination structures. New legislation on GBV and 
domestic violence and consistent multi-sectoral response are 
expected to promote institutional changes in GBV response, 
as well as positive social outcomes in terms of eradicating 
tolerance to GBV. 

The Protection Cluster will continue to develop tools for 
mapping protection response at settlement level and work 
with partners to avoid duplication of services and ensure that 
gaps in service provision are addressed. Coordination will 
strive to harmonise approaches between government services 
and civil society response. Mine Action Sub-Cluster partners 
will share available information on mine contamination and 
mine action activities with local government at oblast level to 
enable better co-ordination and prioritisation of mine action 
activities and increase the efficiency of mine action response. 
The Sub-Cluster will also facilitate dialogue between state 
and oblast level actors to ensure the best possible feedback 
to the affected population. The Child Protection Sub-Cluster 
will provide multi-sector specialised services for children, 
particularly adolescent girls and boys and their families, 
to prevent and respond to protection risks. The GBV Sub-
Cluster will enhance and facilitate referral pathways for GBV 
survivors, which includes working with partners on GBV 
response mapping, disseminating referral cards and updating 
the referral directory (accessible at http://bit.ly/GBVSC) on a 
regular basis. 

The Child Protection Sub-Cluster will also collaborate with 
local authorities to strengthen child protection systems, 
promote sustainability and quality in child protection services 
through consolidated and coordinated approaches in capacity 
building, especially in psychosocial support for child victims 
of violence, abuse and neglect. The Age and Disability 

PROTECTION

PROTECTION



Technical Working Group will continue to coordinate with 
relevant ministries to share best practices for strengthening 
the rights of the elderly. This will be achieved through capacity 
building and training on Minimum Standards for Age and 
Disability Inclusion into Humanitarian Action. This is in line 
with the global Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and 
the Madrid International Plan of Action on Ageing. The AGD 
TWG will also promote the gradual handover - where and if 
possible - of the most vulnerable beneficiaries receiving home-
based care to territorial centres and local partners.

In order to ensure sustainability of GBV shelters and mobile 
teams providing PSS to GBV survivors, which have been 
developed by humanitarian actors or undertaken jointly with 
state service providers, the GBV Sub-Cluster will focus on 
transferring ownership to governmental partners.

2019 operations

Priority response activities

In order to ensure that protection for people of concern is 
strengthened, the Protection Cluster will conduct protection 
assessments, protection and human rights monitoring and 
advocate on key protection issues at national and local 
level. Protection partners will disseminate information on 
legal assistance, IDP registration, access to pensions and 
social benefits, documentation, housing land and property 
rights, child protection, risks of trafficking, GBV risks and 
prevention, referrals, and availability of life-saving services 
targeting around 1.1 million people. Partners will provide 
mine risk education to over 82,000 children and adults. 
Mine Action partners will conduct surveying, marking and 
clearance of mine and ERW contaminated areas. Capacity 
building for local authorities, service providers, caregivers and 
community representatives will be conducted on a wide range 
of protection issues covering more than 20,000 people.

Protection partners will provide essential services to about 
400,000 people through legal assistance and protection 
counselling to facilitate enjoyment of rights and access to 
social services, individual protection assistance (cash and non-
cash), mine victim assistance, individual psychosocial support 
and through child friendly spaces; outreach solutions and 
shelters (crisis centres) for GBV survivors; and community 
spaces for older people and people with disabilities. 

To promote peaceful coexistence and durable solutions, the 
Protection Cluster will engage 135,000 IDPs and conflict-
affected people in community support initiatives, peaceful 
coexistence and social cohesion projects.

Strengthening protection for persons of concern, 
including prevention and mitigation of rights 
violations

Protection 

Protection partners will conduct 7,700 protection monitoring 
missions in the area up to 20 kilometres within the ‘contact 
line’, checkpoints, NGCA, as well as other areas with a high 
concentration of IDPs, particularly in centres for service 
provision and collective centres. More than 50,000 people will 
be provided with legal assistance to ensure access to social 
benefits and pensions for IDPs, birth and death registration 
for people residing in NGCA, restoring lost or destroyed 
documentation and ensuring housing, land and property 
rights. Legal assistance will be provided at checkpoints, up 
to 20 kilometres of the ‘contact line’ as well as in the areas 
outside. Protection counselling will be provided to 48,000 
people in NGCA on services available in NGCA as well as 
in GCA. 3,000 elderly people will be provided home-based 
care support in the area up to 5 kilometres of the ‘contact line’ 
while 3,500 elderly people will be assisted through community 
safe spaces.

135,000 people will be covered through social cohesion and 
community support activities in NGCA, inside and outside 
the area along the ‘contact line’. 

Around 700 training sessions on protection issues covering 
20,000 people will be conducted at national and local 
level: IDPs’ rights and access to entitlements, access to 
documentation, multi-sectoral response to GBV, psychosocial 
support, positive parenting practices, disability inclusion, 
mine risk education and prevention of burnout for service 
providers. 

Protection Coordination meetings will take place in Kyiv, 
Kharkiv, Kramatorsk, Mariupol, Sievierodonetsk and Donetsk.

Child protection

Child protection interventions will be expanded in NGCA 
and in the areas up to 20 kilometres within the ‘contact line’ 
in GCA with increased presence and service delivery near the 
‘contact line’ and isolated settlements. Given the increasing 
child protection needs in these locations, special focus will be 
given to scaling up targeted and tailored interventions aimed 
at addressing the protection risks of adolescent girls and boys, 
and for the most vulnerable, particularly children with specific 
needs and those at risk of separation from their families.

Gender-based violence (GBV)

A focus on GBV prevention and response activities will be 
implemented in the area along the ‘contact line’ as well as 
outside it in Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts with a focus on 
prevention, referrals for survivors, capacity building for local 
actors and community-based protection mechanisms. 375,000 
people at risk of GBV and GBV survivors will be targeted 
through awareness raising activities. 30,000 people at risk of 
GBV and GBV survivors will be provided with individual and 
group psychosocial support. GBV survivors will be provided 
with comprehensive services in eight shelters supported by 
protection partners.

Mine action

Mine Action Sub-Cluster partners will work closely with 
state authorities to strengthen mine action responses, 
including engaging with local authorities to enable clearance 
and handover of previously contaminated territories. Mine 
Action partners will survey and mark 5,000,000 m² of mined 
areas, conducting both technical and non-technical surveys 
and demine 2,350,000 m². They will provide mine risk 
education to 82,000 children and adults. Mine Action partners 
will provide capacity building to government authorities, 
including in the areas of modernisation of training curriculum 
for de-miners in line with IMAS/NMAS, information 
management and mine victim assistance. In addition to mine 



clearance activities, upon adoption of the Law on Mine Action 
support will be provided for the establishment of a national 
mine action centre, development of rules and regulations for 
mine action operations as well as coordination structures 
at regional level in Donetsk and Luhansk oblast to enhance 
government-led integrated planning, coordination and 
operational response in eastern Ukraine.

Response modalities

Protection assistance will be provided via a range of 
modalities, including mobile teams, individual and group 
counselling, face to face and telephone counselling, and 
through community centres. Individual protection assistance 
will be provided in NGCA and up to 20 kilometres with the 
‘contact line’ in GCA to meet the needs of people with specific 
needs. Determining modality will be based on individual 
protection assessments, taking into account the availability of 
markets. 

Protection partners will provide in-kind assistance where 
assistive devices and diapers for older people and people 
with disabilities are required, as these specific items are 
not available in the areas along the ‘contact line’. In NGCA, 
individual protection assistance will be provided in-kind 
due to limitations on operating with cash. Measures will be 
taken to provide a tailored approach to individual needs, to 
ensure effective response. Ensuring AAP through feedback 
mechanisms, community participation and referrals will be 
prioritised.

Impact of humanitarian interventions

Individual and community-based protection activities by 
Protection Cluster partners have provided much-needed 
assistance in NGCA, where people would otherwise not have 
access to services such as legal counselling and psychosocial 
support as well as community-based initiatives. Interventions 
in NGCA target people with specific needs, including the 
elderly, single-parent households and children. In the absence 
of comprehensive services for GBV survivors in NGCA, safe 
space and support to survivors of domestic violence has been 
provided. 

Training community volunteers in the area up to five 
kilometres of the ‘contact line’, especially in locations where 
access of humanitarian actors is limited, has allowed for the 
dissemination of information about essential services and 
strengthened outreach to conflict-affected people with specific 
needs who are at heightened risk. With limited state social 
services, community volunteers have been trained to provide 
home-based care to older people with limited mobility. 
Training youth focal points at professional technical colleges 
has engaged adolescents in discussions regarding risky 
behaviour in a peer-to-peer format. 

Protection Cluster partners have provided much-needed 
psychosocial support to children and their families, to 
GBV survivors and to the elderly. Community centres have 
empowered local communities and provided much-needed 
protection services, referrals and support. Mine Action 
partners have ensured the safety of civilians by undertaking 
mine risk education, surveying, marking and demining.

Linkages and synergies with interventions outside the scope of the 
Humanitarian Response Plan

Reducing and ending needs

Protection partners are integrating sustainability into their humanitarian interventions by working closely with 
development actors and government authorities. As a part of the Humanitarian-Development Nexus (HDN), protection 
actors work closely with development partners to promote durable solutions, maximise resources, build upon a wide 
range of expertise, and ensure that their programmes are complementary and sustainable. Protection has been at the 
centre of the humanitarian response in Ukraine and it is important that a right’s-based approach is integrated into 
the early recovery and development response as well. Protection partners ensure that protection is mainstreamed in 
development work and that those with specific needs, such as the elderly, people with disabilities and ethnic minorities, 
who may be marginalised, are fully integrated into early recovery and development programming. Protection partners 
implementing legal assistance programs are working with government free legal aid centers to build their capacity to take 
over provision of free legal aid to displaced people. The sustainability of assistance to older people in the areas along the 
‘contact line’ will be based on strengthening linkages with the Territorial Centres (Social Welfare Centres) managed by the 
Ministry of Social Policy. HelpAge International, which leads the Age and Disability Technical Working Group, has signed 
MoUs with MoSP and MTOT to support greater localisation and management of the home-based care services needed 
in conflict-affected areas and to increase their involvement in emergency response. The Child Protection Sub-Cluster is 
working closely with local authorities to ensure that humanitarian efforts are linked to government development plans, 
and also to support the recovery process linking humanitarian response to existing systems. Regional programmes 
on multi sectoral response and prevention of GBV developed in coordination with the government and regional GBV 
working groups are co-chaired by local authorities and have the capacity to lead multi-sectoral response to GBV. Local 
communities and service providers (including those operating along the ‘contact line’) will be equipped with information 
material on GBV and trained to conduct community level GBV prevention, advocacy and communication actions. 
The GBV Sub-Cluster will continue to work with development actors to further develop a network of shelters for GBV 
survivors, especially in Luhansk oblast, where this is a key protection gap. Humanitarian mine action partners are working 
together with national authorities and development actors to support the government in developing a national framework 
for mine action, including standards, legislation, mine victim assistance and information management systems.



PART II: Food security and livelIhoods

FOOD SECURITY AND LIVELIHOODS

PEOPLE IN NEEDPEOPLE TARGETED# OF PROJECTSREQUIREMENTS (US$)# OF PARTNERS1319.2M131.1M80K
FOOD SECURITY AND LIVELIHOODS 
OBJECTIVE 3

3Affected populations have access to 
employment and income generating 
opportunities through rehabilitation/building 
sustainable livelihood assets 

 RELATES TO CO1 

FOOD SECURITY AND LIVELIHOODS 
OBJECTIVE 1

1Most vulnerable conflict-affected groups have 
immediate access to food. 

FOOD SECURITY AND LIVELIHOODS 
OBJECTIVE 2

2Affected populations improve food security 
status through rehabilitated agriculture 
and/or increased agricultural production for 
sustainable livelihoods

RELATES TO CO1 , CO3 

RELATES TO CO2 

Cluster multi-year strategy

The Cluster strategy continues emphasizing the need for life-saving food security interventions in high-priority locations 
through the most feasible delivery modalities to vulnerable populations. While implementing life-sustaining agricultural and 
livelihoods programming, FSLC partners will be also supporting the development of resilience capacities and assisting affected 
civilians to access basic services, goods and critical infrastructures. 

Response approach

Following the results of a number of sector 
assessments and considering various context-
specific needs of women, girls, boys and men 
affected by the conflict, common beneficiary 
selection criteria and response approach 
have been developed within FSCL members. 
However, in a context of limited humanitarian 
presence (particularly in NGCA) and severely 
restricted funding, the availability of realistic 
targeting has been applied to prioritise 
those in critical need (e.g. single-headed 
households with children, pensioners with 
minimum pension, households headed by 
unemployed people aged 40-60 etc.). This 
approach reflects both the response capacity 
restrictions faced by cluster partners as well 
as the geographical preference to ensure that 
all food insecure areas would be appropriately 
covered, and overlaps are avoided: more than 
60 per cent of planned interventions aim 
to cover areas closest to the ‘contact line’ (5 
km) and NGCA. Moreover, considering that 
recovery and development initiatives are 
largely yet to be launched, FSLC partners still 
recognise increasing humanitarian sectoral 
needs for reinforced resilience through 
livelihoods interventions (agricultural and 
non-agricultural) in more secure areas, which 
would enable communities to resist future 
shocks and reduce dependence on aid. FSLC 
will also promote and increase efforts to 
scale up multi-sectoral assistance in areas of 
high severity of needs. A guiding principle of 
the operational response of FSLC based on 
neutrality and high humanitarian standards.

Mainstreaming of cross-cutting issues

FSLC partners will continue to mainstream 
gender and protection concerns throughout 
the programme cycle and conduct a proper 
contextual analysis of the target areas to 
identify and mitigate any risks from a 
protection and social perspective. Partners 
are responsible for regular monitoring of 
programmes by collecting disaggregated data 
by age and gender.

The cluster will continue to apply needs-based 
targeting using harmonised selection criteria 
as well as unified cash-based transfer value 

2019 REQUIREMENT(US$)

32

11.2M CRITICALREQUIREMENT19.2MTOTAL 
REQUIREMENT
54%
55%
14 | 59 | 27%
21 | 54 | 25%
PEOPLE IN NEED 
PEOPLE TARGETED26K23K17K13K0.7M0.2M0.2M% female% children, 
adults, 
the elderly*
BY SEX & AGE(0-5 km area along the 
‘contact line’)
(5-20 km area along the 
‘contact line’) 
(Excluding the 20 km 
area along 
‘contact line’)
NGCAGCAGCARest of GCABY GEOGRAPHICAL PRIORITY 
*Children (<18 years old), adults (18-59 years), elderly (60+ years)Other$11.2M$8.0M
CONTACT

Alexandra Malukalo

FSLC Coordinator

amalukalo@fscluster.org 

.



and food parcel composition to avoid any tensions in the 
community. Beneficiary feedback mechanisms are available 
to ensure accountability to the affected populations. Partners 
will also focus on safe delivery of assistance, careful selection 
of distribution sites and coordination with local authorities, 
including on avoiding areas with land mines and explosive 
remnants of war (ERWs). Within the MYHRP response, 
cluster partners would continue applying community-centred 
approaches as well as ‘do-no-harm’ principles.

For gradually reducing humanitarian needs and chronic 
vulnerability, cluster partners will continue to promote 
economic self-reliance of the affected populations through 
early recovery livelihoods and agricultural interventions, 
including for IDPs to be able to rebuild their financial assets 
and improve living conditions. The FSLC will further be 
linking development and humanitarian actions through 
active participation in the Collective Outcome group “Self-
Sufficiency” and foster a closer partnership with recovery and 
development actors, at the same time promoting government 
leadership.

Greater efficiencies over a multi-year period 

In order to maximise resources and ensure a well-coordinated 
response, the FSLC continuous its engagement with national 
and local authorities, United Nations agencies, NGO 
partners and other key stakeholders. Given the protracted 
nature of the crises and political context in Ukraine as well 
as the expectation that humanitarian aid would be needed 
for some unpredictable period of time, a multi-year plan 
is expected to be highly appropriate for the FSL sector, 
focused on establishing a longer-term response strategy and 
sustainability of results. Considering the linkages between the 
socio-economic aspects and food insecurity, the gradual shift 
towards early recovery and livelihoods activities has been a 
growing priority for the FSLC. Under the Cluster Objectives 
2 and 3, programmes will be tailored to integrate response, 
recovery and resilience-building to save lives, restore 
livelihoods and initiate longer-term solutions for the people in 
protracted socio-economic vulnerability. People who require 
immediate rapid response will continue to be supported. 
In areas with a high risk of escalation of the conflict and 
where vulnerabilities are high, the FSLC will investigate 
the possibility for introduction of early warning systems. 
Capacity building of government on emergency preparedness 
would be another focus for the MYHRP. FSLC would also be 
promoting using cash interventions where possible to support 
functioning markets.

Food security is the result of a variety of factors such as 
access, availability, utilisation, stability and all aligning 
simultaneously, so in this prospective cross-sectoral 
coordination is viewed as a critical strategy (e.g. availability of 
clean water will allow people proper food utilisation; access 
to respective health facilities complemented by conditional 
food distributions will motivate and prevent conflict-affected 
food insecure people leaving with HIV and TB of treatment 
interruption). The FSLC will further explore and strengthen 
multi-sectoral synergies to the possible extent to ensure a 
holistic response plan.

2019 operations

Priority response activities

The FSLC will focus on activities designed to meet the 
short- and medium-term food security needs of vulnerable 
populations in eastern Ukraine. It incorporates cross-cutting 
issues such as gender and protection while considering 
seasonality. Based on the prioritised vulnerability criteria 
FSLC partners are aiming to address the needs with mixed 
interventions (both emergency life-saving and early recovery 
where feasible), applying transitional activities through 
livelihoods programming which remains a priority for the 
cluster (both agricultural and non-agricultural to help restore 
productive assets). Under Objective 1 for life-saving food 
assistance, the cluster will aim to address the immediate 
needs of people to meet their monthly food requirements 
while promote the building or rehabilitation of assets that will 
improve longer-term food security and resilience through 
initiatives such as “Food for work”, “Food for assets” and 
“Food for training” (e.g. nutrition-awareness sessions). 
Agriculture household-level early recovery activities under 
Objective 2 will aim at rehabilitating productive assets tailored 
to the local context and building on the previous experience 
of cluster partners, as these activities have become a critical 
source of alternative livelihoods in eastern Ukraine. Under 
Objective 3, cluster partners will conduct a range of vocational 
and skill trainings and provide business grants to open the 
window for income generating opportunities.

People targeted and geographical scope 

To ensure access to food for the most vulnerable groups, 
especially during winter, FSLC partners will target up to 
60,000 people with general food assistance considering agreed 
and harmonised vulnerability criteria and recommended 
modalities, prioritisation, seasonality and ‘do-no-harm’ 
principles. To help restore productive assets and complement 
household income, cluster agriculture–based programmes 
will support nearly 11,000 people through interventions 
like rehabilitation of agricultural productive assets (e.g. 
irrigation systems, greenhouses and orchards), distribution 
of agricultural inputs (e.g. small farming kits, agro-vouchers 
for equipment) as well as agricultural training and business 
grants. For further reinforcing resilience of the conflict-
affected population over 7,000 able-bodied but economically 
vulnerable individuals will be supported through early 
recovery livelihoods and income generating activities. Priority 
is given to the most food insecure, vulnerable groups in need 
of livelihood assistance living in GCA, NGCA and along the 
‘contact line’ as well as vulnerable IDPs outside of Donbas.

Response modalities

Taking into account assessed sector-specific needs identified 
as well as operational capacities and humanitarian access 
constraints, FSLC partners aim to assist people in need by 
leveraging response modalities and assets. Assistance will be 
provided through a flexible mix of in-kind food and cash-
based transfers (CBTs), wherever feasible and cost-effective. 
Partners will scale-up the use of CBTs (the larger part is 

PART II: FOOD SECURITY AND LIVELIHOODS

PROTECTION

33



already planned to be delivered via CBT modality which 
includes both cash transfers and food vouchers), contingent 
on financial infrastructure and market conditions also 
considering people’s preferences to have a variety of choice 
and nutritious goods. This scale-up is likely to have indirect 
positive impacts on local markets and value chains. Where 
CBT is not feasible, in-kind food will be distributed to those 
who have been cut off from access to markets, experience 
security or protection risks or have experienced sudden 
onset displacement. Agricultural grants, vouchers and assets 
will provide relief to farming households and contribute to 
strengthening the resilience of their livelihoods, increasing 
agricultural production, improving food security and 
nutrition and reducing rural poverty. 

Delivery of non-agricultural self-sustenance and self-
employment grants, assets and trainings will strengthen 
the resilience of crisis-affected populations by empowering 
IDPs, returnees and host community members through the 
provision of sustainable livelihoods and income generating 
opportunities tailored to their specific needs and geographical 
priorities. FSLC partners will review risks and mitigation 
measures regularly and make the necessary adjustments to 
response modalities and implementation methods depending 
on dynamics on the ground.

Impact of humanitarian interventions 

During 2018, post-distribution monitoring of provided 
humanitarian assistance by FSLC partners has shown positive 
impact in alleviating the immediate food and livelihood 
needs of conflict-affected people and preventing further 
deterioration of food insecurity. This is evident in a decrease 
of the overall food insecurity levels in both GCA and NGCA 
in 2018, compared to that of 2017. In GCA, the number of 
severely food insecure people has dropped from 0.9 per cent 
in 2017 to 0.5 per cent in 2018. Similarly, the number of 
moderately food insecure people has decreased from 14 per 
cent in 2017 to 9 per cent in 2018. In NGCA, the number 
of severely food insecure people has dropped from 5.2 per 
cent in 2017 to 3.2 per cent in 2018, while the number of 
moderately food insecure people has decreased from 21 per 
cent in 2017 to 17.4 per cent in 2018. While it is not possible 
to attribute this positive trend entirely to humanitarian aid, 
it may be fair to say that the provided food assistance has 
contributed positively to this significant reduction of food 
insecurity levels among conflict-affected people. However, 
despite the drop, the level of food insecurity levels remain 
high and continued actions to address it is required in order 
to sustain this positive trend and avoid a negative reverse, 
particularly among the most vulnerable, amidst growing 
food prices, unemployment and seasonal complications in 
food access. Further efforts will be required to strengthen 
the collaboration with recovery and development actors to 
achieve the Collective Outcome specifically on “Protection 
and Livelihoods”.

PART II: FOOD SECURITY AND LIVELIHOODS

34

Linkages and synergies with interventions outside the scope of the 
Humanitarian Response Plan

Reducing and ending needs

FSLC MYHRP is designed to facilitate a more effective humanitarian response aiming at more predictable and 
appropriate operational arrangements and a greater focus on the sustainability of results. Suggested activities will be 
implemented by cluster partners, both governmental and non-governmental, using various forms of partnerships. This 
will help increase the ownership of interventions and will contribute to the development of local capacities. Cluster 
partners have been conducting consultations with the Government to support the introduction of early-recovery 
activities to ensure a return to normality for the affected populations in eastern Ukraine and set out a vision for moving 
beyond the crisis in a protracted humanitarian context. Partners will conduct the activities aiming at improving the food 
security status and livelihoods of the affected people in close coordination with state institutions, which are presented 
in those areas along the ‘contact line’. By conducting capacity building activities and investment in human capital by 
training the affected people, the FSLC will complement the work of the Government and other United Nations agencies. 

Like in many other countries, the Government of Ukraine consists of sector-based ministries and agencies with resource 
allocations and accountability managed accordingly. The FSLC will continue to establish linkages between development 
and humanitarian actions involving the respective line ministries through the Humanitarian-Development Nexus 
(HDN), particularly in GCA. The FSLC will also continue to support the development of synergies with actors outside the 
scope of the humanitarian sector and coordinate with non HRP partners in order not to duplicate the efforts and avoid 
any potential gaps.



HEALTH AND NUTRITION

PEOPLE IN NEEDPEOPLE TARGETED# OF PROJECTSREQUIREMENTS (US$)# OF PARTNERS1018.1M101.3M1.3M
HEALTH & NUTRITION OBJECTIVE 1

1 Provision of direct life-saving and primary health care services (through fixed 
and mobile clinics) including integrated Sexual and Reproductive Health 
services and Mental health and Psychosocial support. 


RELATES TO CO2 

 

HEALTH & NUTRITION OBJECTIVE 2

2Restoration and/or rehabilitation of disrupted health services and 
infrastructure.

RELATES TO CO2 , CO3 

Cluster multi-year strategy

Health and Nutrition Cluster partners will continue to support national and local authorities to improve the availability of 
health care in Ukraine and directly provide quality and reliable emergency and essential services for those most vulnerable 
living in conflict-affected areas.

Response approach

The response targets those most vulnerable 
living in conflict-affected areas: residents and 
IDPs within the area of up to 20 kilometres of 
the ‘contact line’, in NGCA; and in Luhanska 
and Donetska oblasts. Some of the most 
vulnerable include: the elderly, those with 
disabilities and limited mobility, pregnant and 
lactating women, orphans, female-headed 
households as well as young children. There 
will be an increased focus on supporting 
health authorities with system improvements 
and restructuring (as per the ongoing Health 
System Reform) to meet the current demand 
driven by system disruption, population 
displacement and violence. Wherever needed, 
partners will fill critical gaps in health service 
delivery, including lack of immediate access 
to life-saving and essential health care, and 
continue to monitor the situation to make any 
necessary changes as the situation evolves.

Mainstreaming of cross-cutting issues

The cluster will continue to support critical 
disease control programmes, including early 
detection of tuberculosis, HIV, and sexually-
transmitted infections through provision 
of diagnostic and treatment consumables. 
Prevention of Mother-to-Child transmission 
of HIV / AIDS (PMTCT) is a major gap 
in existing primary health-care activities. 
Non-communicable diseases remain the 
number one cause of death in Ukraine and 
addressing them will be cross-cutting in 
cluster programming. In order to avert further 
emotional distress and long-term mental 
health problems (either resulting from or 
exacerbated by conflict), cluster partners 
will expand this comprehensive approach 
to provide mental health and psychosocial 
support (MHPSS) to those affected. The focus 
will be on expanding provision of MHPSS 
at the primary care and community levels, 
Psychological First Aid (PFA), capacity 
building trainings i.e mhGAP, strengthening 
referral chains, and implementing evidence-
based, rights-oriented care for the most 
vulnerable inpatient service users with 
severe mental disorders. Activities will link 
with protection actions, particularly when 
supporting/referring GBV and child protection 
cases, complementing actions and avoiding 
duplication as much as possible.

2019 REQUIREMENT(US$)

17.3M CRITICALREQUIREMENT18.1MTOTAL 
REQUIREMENT 
0.6M 0.2M 0.3M 0.2MPEOPLE IN NEED 
PEOPLE TARGETED% female% children, 
adults, 
the elderly*
BY GEOGRAPHICAL PRIORITY BY SEX & AGEGCA(0-5 km area along the 
‘contact line’)
(5-20 km area along the 
‘contact line’) 
(Excluding the 20 km 
area along 
‘contact line’)
GCARest of GCANGCA*Children (<18 years old), adults (18-59 years), elderly (60+ years)Other60%
60%
20| 50 |30%
20| 50 |30% 
0.6M 0.2M 0.3M 0.2M
CONTACT

Gabriel Novelo Sierra 

Health Cluster Coordinator, 
WHO

novelog@who.int



Greater efficiencies over a multi-year period

The cluster will permanently advocate for wider unrestricted 
access to areas and populations of humanitarian concern to 
improve health-care provision as well as for the continued 
protection of health workers and health-care facilities from 
conflict-related damage as per International Humanitarian 
Law. Gaps will be filled based on improved coordination 
and monitoring as well as structural developments 
that will contribute to the overall sustainability of the 
Ukrainian health-care system. Ongoing efforts to improve 
programmatic approaches and interventions for health will 
continue, involving beneficiaries and local authorities in 
decision-making, collecting their feedback and adapting 
accordingly, the Collective Outcome (COs) of these actions 
is that the affected population’s health status improves, health 
services are available and accessible to those who need them 
most. The protracted nature of this crisis requires the cluster 
to ensure that delivery of life-saving interventions link with 
ongoing recovery and development activities and increase 
synergies in areas of common work and interest. 

2019 operations

Priority response activities

• Provision of direct life-saving and primary health-care 
services (through fixed and mobile clinics), including 
integrated sexual and reproductive health services and 
mental health and psychosocial support
• Restoration and/or rehabilitation of disrupted health 
services and infrastructure
• Procurement, pre-positioning and distribution of 
medical supplies, essential medication and equipment 
through established and mobile health-care services
• Provision of financial support to vulnerable affected 
population through cash and vouchers for health-care 
expenses
• Healthcare and nutrition education to improve and 
update knowledge and skills of healthcare providers
• Direct support to laboratories (including blood bank 
services) to improve availability, quality and safety 
standards
• Health and nutrition education, awareness, social 
mobilisation and advocacy activities for affected 
population


People targeted and geographical scope

The Health Cluster partners are targeting an overall 1.3 
million people of which 643,000 are in NGCA and around 
657,000 in GCA (434,000 in the 0-20km along the ‘contact 
line’ and 223,000 beyond the 20 km geographic area of 
priority) the response targets those most vulnerable living 
in conflict-affected areas: residents and IDPs within the 0-20 
km of the ‘contact line’, in the NGCA; and in Luhanska and 
Donetska oblasts, some of the most vulnerable in include 
older persons, those with disabilities and limited mobility, 
pregnant & lactating women, orphans, female headed 
households as well as children under five years old. 

As the availability of the services is directly linked to health 
facilities locations (for example main hospitals for cancer 
and newborn care in the region are both located in NGCA), 
affected populations movement will remain fluid between 
and across the ‘contact line’ (security allowing) in order 
to access services, because of this, Health Cluster partners 
provide estimated targets and not specific, per-activity 
numbers for planning purposes, another reason is the 
incomplete, limited epidemiological information available 
from the conflict-affected areas (particularly in NGCA) that 
make forecasting difficult as per the lack of a reliable baseline 
for the different programs and interventions.

Response modalities

Cluster partners will directly provide emergency and 
essential health services for the most vulnerable living in 
conflict-affected areas which will include mobile services, 
support to fixed health facilities and community outreach. 
Building back health-care services provides an opportunity 
to ensure continuity of care for patients and the sustainability 
of health-care provision. Strengthening early warning 
systems for timely detection and response to outbreak and 
epidemics will reduce loss of life and any associated long-
term consequences. 

Partners will increase community engagement and risk 
communication to increase awareness and promote 
individual actions to protect health and reduce health 
risks for both individuals and communities. Public health 
measures will be enhanced by strengthening vaccination 
programmes, improving safety and quality in laboratory 
and diagnostic capacity, technical guidance and information 
management to monitor and address priority public health 
risks. Service availability monitoring and mapping will help 
detect and reduce interruptions to health-care services. In 
order to help alleviate cost barriers to services (medication, 
transportation, diagnostics tests), cash- and voucher-based 
assistance will be provided to particularly vulnerable groups, 
i.e. those with especially high medical costs due to life-
threatening and chronic conditions, children under five years 
old, people living with disabilities and pregnant and lactating 
women.

Impact of humanitarian interventions

Ukraine has the second-highest HIV prevalence rate in 
eastern Europe and accounts for eight per cent of new 
infections and 25 per cent of AIDS deaths, the country 
also carries a high burden of tuberculosis (2nd largest in 
Europe) and ranks 4th in the world with multi-drug resistant 
tuberculosis. With active assistance from the international 
community, it was possible to avoid critical shortages in 
treatment drugs and critical lab consumables in NGCA as 
successful application to the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, 
TB and Malaria provided substantial earmarked funding 
to prevent the interruption of TB and HIV treatments for 
the period of 2018-20 as all critical lab equipment, basic 



medical consumables, modern drugs and the funds required 
for the next three years have been secured. HIV treatment 
was optimised in line with WHO recommendations (one pill 
once a day) for the majority of patients increasing treatment 
compliance. Access to treatment considerably expanded with 
more than 10,000 people receiving life-saving medication 
by April 2018. Over the last year, procurement of second 
line TB medicines and technical maintenance of laboratory 
equipment resumed in Donetsk, and much needed TB 
laboratory machines and the required reagents were also 
procured to Luhansk.

Linkages and synergies with interventions outside the scope of the 
Humanitarian Response Plan

Reducing and ending needs

In Ukraine, the key interventions in healthcare are linked to direct delivery, structural support, advocacy, and 
coordination. The Health Cluster will continue to be led by WHO. Health programmes in Ukraine also engage in various 
cross-cutting and cross-sectoral themes (e.g. mental health and psychosocial support engages cooperation between health 
and protection, or area-based initiative in Mariupol between health, protection, food security, and shelter) and collaborate 
with aid agencies and donors on subjects such as the Humanitarian-Development Nexus (HDN) and peacebuilding 
initiatives. Health is a cross-cutting theme in Ukraine, prioritised by populations in the Sustainable Development Goals 
(SDG) surveys, and it aims to promote greater cohesion across agencies and to dovetail the humanitarian response with 
recovery, development and peacebuilding actors. WHO and health partners discuss vulnerabilities and raise awareness 
of key specific issues to encourage authorities and other stakeholders to act according to their duties and responsibilities. 
The cluster plays a key role as central repository of knowledge and experience from the different partners engaged in the 
response and acts as a platform for discussion on different evidence-based perspectives from project implementation, 
which will enhance the technical expertise in the design and implementation of health programmes.



WATER, SANITATION AND HYGIENE

PEOPLE IN NEEDPEOPLE TARGETED# OF PROJECTSREQUIREMENTS (US$)# OF PARTNERS1331.8M113.2M2.0M
WASH OBJECTIVE 1

1 Ensure immediate and sustainable access to sufficient safe water and 
minimal levels of sanitation provision for conflict-affected people.


RELATES TO CO2 , CO3

WASH OBJECTIVE 2

2 Increased availability of critical WASH-related hygiene supplies and 
information for the prevention of water- and sanitation-related diseases .


RELATES TO CO2 

Cluster multi-year strategy

WASH Cluster objectives in the 2019-2020 HRP contribute directly to the third Collective Outcome (CO3) as many emergency 
repairs to WASH infrastructure increase access to critical civilian structures, by strengthening those structures both 
physically and through capacity building of management of these strucures. Additionally, WASH projects increase access to 
critical services (CO2) through sanitation services, improving water supply and sanitation at health centres and schools and 
through provision of hygiene items.

Response approach

Planned WASH interventions are driven 
by observed and recorded lack of access to 
adequate safe water and sanitation facilities. 
As such, a multi-agency WASH assessment 
(planned for early 2019) will explore the 
human cost of conflict-related water and 
sanitation gaps in eastern Ukraine as well as 
establish a baseline for WASH Knowledge, 
Attitudes and Practices (KAP).

Programming in the WASH sector will address 
the second and third overall strategic priorities 
of the HRP, increase access to essential 
services as well as critical civilian structures by 
repairing infrastructure.

Work will be completed substantially in all 
raions within five kilometres of the ‘contact 
line’, and in NGCA of Luhansk aand Donetska 
oblasts, and extended to outside of those zones, 
wherever humanitarian imperative exists. 
Communities are not only affected by shelling 
and fighting, but also by conflict-related acute 
economic deterioration in the affected oblasts, 
where the crumbling water infrastructure 
now risks disease outbreak. Humanitarian 
action will be adapted to humanitarian needs 
alone, without reference to political divisions. 
Implementing agencies will work closely with 
local authorities, not to replace any existing 
mechanisms.

WASH Cluster partners face challenges related 
to access, but continue to work dynamically to 
portray the impartiality of the implementing 
agencies and to close communication gaps 
between agencies and authorities. They will 
also work with donors to ensure sufficient 
funding is made available. As community 
WASH work, such as emptying septic tanks 
or calculating water tariffs, depends on family 
income, the WASH Cluster will coordinate 
with Food Security & Livelihoods as well 
as Shelter teams around obvious overlaps. 
Disaster Risk Reduction (DRR) initiatives 
making use of Water Safety Plans are explored 
as a link to transitional programming and with 
reference to mitigating against conflict-related 
environmental risks to water supplies.

2019 REQUIREMENT(US$)

20.8M CRITICALREQUIREMENT31.8MTOTAL 
REQUIREMENT
2.2M** 0.5M 0.5M 
1.3M 0.2M*** 0.3M*** 0.2M***
54%
54%
PEOPLE IN NEED 
PEOPLE TARGETED14 | 59| 27%
14 | 59 | 27%
** It is estimated that 80% of the 1.97 million people (1.6 million total) living in Donetsk NGCA are in need of WASH assistance, as well as 0.2 million people in Luhansk city and 
0.4 million people served by the north part of the Karbonit water system: they regularly experience water quality or quantity problems, and water stoppages, that cannot be resolved 
without external assistance, including materials and water treatment chemicals supplied to water companies. 
*** Including total of 120,000 IDPs in GCA% female% children, 
adults, 
the elderly*
BY SEX & AGEBY GEOGRAPHICAL PRIORITY 
*Children (<18 years old), adults (18-59 years), elderly (60+ years)
GCA(0-5 km area along the 
‘contact line’)
GCA(5-20 km area along the 
‘contact line’)
GCA(Excluding the 20 km 
area along 
‘contact line’)
NGCA
CONTACT

Mark Buttle

WASH Cluster and 
Infrastructure Coordinator

mbuttle@unicef.org 



washcluster.ukraine@gmail.
com 

.



Mainstreaming of cross-cutting issues

Better knowledge of needs due to a full assessment in 2019 
will allow additional programme accountability both to 
donors and beneficiaries. Longer-term thinking related to 
DRR approaches in WASH will help build resilience and 
link to HDN. WASH programming is likely to positively 
affect the carer’s lives (often women). In the current norms 
or domestic roles, women predominantly shoulder a greater 
burden of looking after family members and for family health 
in general, which makes women the key users of water in 
the domestic sense. Gender-balanced participation will be 
strongly encouraged at all stages of project delivery while 
implementing agencies will be encouraged to challenge any 
predefined roles.

Greater connectivity with development initiatives will be 
achieved through collaborating with the drinking water 
programme of Ukraine, decentralisation initiatives, electricity 
unbundling and the state recovery programme. The WASH 
Cluster remains committed to participate in, and if necessary 
lead, the infrastructure component of the HDN. Working 
more closely also with shelter providers, the WASH Cluster 
will consider and move to address interrelated infrastructure 
issues, such as power supply and centralised heating through:

• Greater co-ordination with development actors and 
donors;
• Prioritisation of local government ant NGO partners;
• Consideration of transitional and DRR and capacity-
building approaches; 
• Advocacy on issues that span the humanitarian and 
development spectrum.


Greater efficiencies over a multi-year period

The multi-year modality of the 2019-2020 Humanitarian 
Response Plan will initially drive efficiencies through 
greater involvement of the government departments, water 
companies and authorities in all areas. Longer-term joint 
planning of water system repairs will enable integration of 
recovery planning into humanitarian implementation. In 
the urban and winterised crisis in Ukraine, required repairs 
are often substantial in nature, and due to short annual 
construction period (winter construction is unrealistic) many 
critical projects require more than one summer season to 
plan, procure and construct.

Community WASH programming contributes to household 
income, reducing outgoings on emptying septic tanks or for 
potentially expensive hygiene items, such as nappies or even 
reducing medical bills and relieving carers from drudgery. 
Clear links exist to health sector programming, WASH in 
schools as well as shelter and housing provision. Longer 
timelines for strategy implementation will facilitate inter-
sectoral planning, enabling individual agencies with cluster 
support to develop more integrated programming.

Existing WASH Cluster linkages with the Ministry of 
Regional Development, the Ministry of Temporarily 
Occupied Territories, oblast authorities and oblast regional 
development agencies will form the basis for joint initiatives 
to international donors with peacebuilding options considered 
alongside regular WASH programming. Longer timelines 
should enable critical planning of exit strategies, for example 
at Entry/Exit Checkpoints (EECP) where local authorities 
should step up as soon as possible to cover all WASH needs, 
however, legal and financial issues have prevented them from 
doing so to date

2019 operations

Priority response activities

WASH WASH Cluster priorities for 2019 include supplying 
clean water by any means, including delivery of water 
chemicals and water trucking and testing water quality. 
However, in 2019, this must be combined with sustainable 
emergency repairs as well as the supply of essential material 
and equipment. Sanitation approaches especially equal 
prioritisation of sewage networks with water repairs; WASH 
in schools and health facilities; community sanitation such 
as emptying septic tanks and addressing garbage problems 
especially require action as well as distribution of essential 
hygiene items with hygiene promotion, as required. 
Improved WASH at checkpoints is still needed as the number 
of individual crossings continues to increase, however, 
improving the delivery of operation and maintenance of 
facilities as well as increased coordination with authorities.

WASH agencies will prioritise holistic approaches in 2019, 
focusing on completing sustainable but rapid and life-saving 
interventions. Direct action will be supported by advocacy at 
all levels, calling for access for repairs, protection of civilian 
structures and guarantees of safety for water workers, and 
continues guaranteed access to water and sanitation services 
for everyone affected by the conflict.

People targeted and geographical scope 

Overall, the 11 HRP projects approved by the WASH 
Cluster will target 1.97 million people for direct assistance 
in 2019, which is 62 per cent of the 3.2 million people in 
need. The cluster will target 1.27 million (58 per cent) of 
2.2 million people in need in NGCA and 700,000 (70 per 
cent) of the 1 million people in need in GCA. Low-targeted 
coverage in NGCA is due to realistic expectations of access 
and organisations have balanced their intent to reach all 
people in need with a realistic approach. Of 700,000 targeted 
beneficiaries on the GCA side, 33 per cent live within five 
kilometres of the ‘contact line’ and 43 per cent live between 5 
and 20 kilometres of the ‘contact line’.

In total, the WASH Cluster targets 1 million people for 
improved water quality; 1.25 million for improved access to 
more water, 720,000 for better access to sanitation, 180,000 
people for receiving hygiene items or gaining better access to 
those essential hygiene materials via cash or voucher-based 
activities. Due to overlaps between activities (agencies are 
encouraged to take a holistic approach), the overall number 
of people targeted (1.97 million) is less than the total of 
individual objective-level indicators.



Response modalities

Settlements and municipalities continue to highlight water 
supply as the most pressing need: In 2018, at least 27 per cent 
of people who live close to the “contact line” experienced 
frequent water shortages, either daily or weekly. Coupled with 
lack of access to frontline areas to make repairs to both water 
and sanitation networks, many of which are 70 years old, there 
is a clear need for direct provision of WASH services, clean 
water, sanitation, and sustainable repairs.

A study by TGH showed that hygiene represented only an 
11% share of households’ expenses far behind food (42%), 
health (25%) and shelter (22%). With inadequate income 
and after expenditure on food, health and shelter there is 
little disposable cash left for hygiene. Also between August 
2017 and August 2018 prices for hygiene items increased by 
7%. The same study, led by ACCESS, SCI, NRC, showed that 
outside of urban centers a lower demand of expensive items, 
in spite the high level of need, caused shopkeepers to reduce 
their variety of hygiene products thus creating deficit for 
certain essential products. The least available items are adult 
and infant diapers, only available at 53% and 29% of locations 
surveyed in Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts respectively.

Therefore the WASH cluster overall modality will continue 
to combine direct interventions, service provision, and 
sustainable rapid repairs, in collaboration with water 
companies and the authorities, with cash- and voucher-
based modalities to deliver hygiene items. Where cash based 
programming is not feasible organisations will deliver hygiene 
items in kind.

Impact of humanitarian interventions

By the end of September 2018 HRP partners succeeded in 
reaching 1.3 million (56%) of the 2.3 million people targeted 
for assistance this year, including 900,000 people supplied 
with improved access to clean drinking water. Success stories 
included the delivery and use of water treatment chemicals 
on both sides of the line of contact, and assisting repairs, 
also close to the front lines. Sanitary conditions improved 
at checkpoints, thanks to work of INGOs such as Premiere 
Urgence Internationale, ADRA and MSF, backed up by non-
HRP actors ICRC. 

Access to hygiene items remains a challenge, due to lack of 
income and lack of suitable products in some areas, along with 
access to Non-Government Controlled Areas (NGCA): by 
the third quarter of 2018 only 14% of people receiving WASH 
assistance lived in NGCA areas. The cluster will also refocus 
on sanitation in 2019 alongside water supply work.

However among the successes in Luhansk Oblast 
Popsnyanskyi Vodakanal report that they were able to keep 
the water tariff low, at 9.84 UAH per cubic metre of water, 
compared to the previously calculated economic rate of 13.88, 
to ensure affordability to people living in the area, made 
possible by humanitarian interventions. Reduced leakage and 
therefore energy savings directly attributable to interventions 
by UNICEF, ICRC, People in Need, and other humanitarian 
organisations are credited for this success, and links to 
household savings and improved food security, in addition to 
improving hygiene and health, are apparent.

Linkages and synergies with interventions outside the scope of the 
Humanitarian Response Plan

Reducing and ending needs

The WASH Cluster and UNICEF are leading on convening actors interested in the third Collective Outcome of the 
Humanitarian Development Nexus, and as such have already initiated conversations with shelter actors such UNHCR; 
UNDP; private sector actors such as DTEK; oblast regional development organisations; the Ministry of Temporarily 
Occupied Territories and IDPs (MTOT) and the Ministry of Regional Development (MinRegion); as well as connecting 
with donors including USAID, the EU and the World Bank. While the vision will require additional outreach and 
participation to clarify, there are already opportunities arising, to convene actors in a suitable forum, on a quarterly basis, 
to debate openly on topics such as “how to increase international commitment to support infrastructure recovery?”; “links 
between water, heating and electrical power”; “housing legislation”; “infrastructure-related peacebuilding initiatives” and 
other issues.

Exit strategies remain problematic for the WASH and Infrastructure sectors: systems are macro in scale, crossing over the 
line of contact, and require a level of peace to be in place before humanitarian actions can be replaced with development 
ones, and before development donors could genuinely step in to finance longer terms strategic work on water systems, 
long overdue. 

Cluster members continue to advocate for solutions from the Government of Ukraine and with the de facto entities in 
NGCA.



SHELTER/NFI

PEOPLE IN NEEDPEOPLE TARGETED# OF PROJECTSREQUIREMENTS (US$)# OF PARTNERS1627.0M140.3M0.1M
SHELTER OBJECTIVE 3

3To provide/upgrade durable 
shelter solutions for the most 
vulnerable conflict-affected 
population 

 RELATES TO CO3 

SHELTER OBJECTIVE 1

1 To address essential shelter and NFI 
needs of the most vulnerable IDPs 
and conflict affected population 
through monetized/in-kind assistance 
and contingency. 




RELATES TO CO3 

SHELTER OBJECTIVE 2

2To contribute to adequate 
transitional solutions (cash or 
in-kind) related to shelter and NFI 
needs meeting minimal international 
and national shelter standards

RELATES TO CO3 

SHELTER OBJECTIVE 4

4To enhance the capacities of 
national structures in government-
controlled areas to coordinate and 
meet residual shelter/NFI needs in line 
with humanitarian principles 

 RELATES TO CO3 

Cluster multi-year strategy

The aim of the Shelter/NFI Cluster is to ensure that newly-displaced and conflict-affected populations at risk of displacement 
living along the ‘contact line’ and in NGCA have access to timely and adequate shelter and basic non-food items.

Response approach

In the immediate aftermath of conflict-related 
incidents, cluster partners will continue to 
complement - through the prepositioning of 
adequate stocks of emergency construction 
material and basic non-food items - the local 
authorities’ first response to the needs of 
evacuated families or families whose house 
and basic properties have been damaged. 

In a continued attempt to prevent 
displacement and with particular attention 
to areas that received inadequate assistance, 
cluster partners will identify and respond to 
the residual needs in terms of house repairs 
for the most vulnerable newly-displaced 
and conflict-affected population living along 
the contact line (and not already covered 
by government programmes) as well as in 
NGCA areas, where - at this point of the 
humanitarian response - the majority of 
the shelter/NFI humanitarian needs are 
concentrated.

Cluster partners will also provide heating 
fuel and stoves, warm clothing and shelter 
insulation to most vulnerable population 
living in areas of difficult access, where 
markets are no longer working, or where the 
gas supply or central heating services have 
been interrupted, and who at the same time 
are not already included in government-
funded winterisation programmes.

Mainstreaming of cross-cutting issues

Shelter and non-food items assistance will 
continue to be guided by protection principles 
and to be considered by cluster partners as 
a most effective and impacting component 
of the protection response. In sensitive 
geographic areas, the provision of shelter and 
non-food items will remain the main tool 
to monitor the needs of the population in 
contexts in which pure protection activities 
may be unwelcome. 

For their shelter, NFIs and winterisation 
assistance, cluster partners will continue 
to prioritise vulnerable groups - especially 
women, elderly and people with disabilities 
and serious medical conditions, who 
constitute a large part of the population in the 

2019 REQUIREMENT(US$)

26.6M CRITICALREQUIREMENT27.0MTOTAL 
REQUIREMENT
0.2M 74K 10K 
61K 29K** 27K** 13K**
54%
52%
PEOPLE IN NEED 
PEOPLE TARGETED14 | 59| 27%
15 | 42 | 43%
** Including total of 9,000 IDPs% female% children, 
adults, 
the elderly*
BY SEX & AGEBY GEOGRAPHICAL PRIORITY 
*Children (<18 years old), adults (18-59 years), elderly (60+ years)$0.4MGCA(0-5 km area along the 
‘contact line’)
GCA(5-20 km area along the 
‘contact line’)
GCA(Excluding the 20 km 
area along 
‘contact line’)
NGCA
CONTACT

Andrea Parisi

Shelter/NFI Cluster Co-
ordinator

parisi@unhcr.org

.



target areas. 

Linking humanitarian and development actions, the 
cluster will support activities aiming at securing access to 
adequate accommodation through transitional measures 
for populations in protracted situations by focusing on cash 
for rent, complementing the repairs of heavily damaged or 
totally destroyed houses with community infrastructure 
improvements and developing strategic planning, key 
advocacy messages, and guidance to provide longer-term 
shelter solutions for populations seeking either return or 
integration into host communities.

Greater efficiencies over a multi-year period

In GCA, the Government’s response capacity - mainly in 
terms of emergency shelter repairs and winterisation subsidies 
- is a factor that is already taken into account when assessing 
the residual humanitarian needs and planning the response. 
In this respect, synergies with relevant governmental bodies 
need to be further strengthened. Consistently, the transfer of 
co-ordination responsibilities from the Shelter/NFI Cluster 
to the state duty-bearer is progressing and expected to be 
completed by the end of 2019.

The opportunity to design comprehensive interventions, 
including shelter, WASH, civil infrastructure and livelihoods 
in line with the Humanitarian-Development Nexus (HDN) 
emerged from recent discussions with shelter partners and 
other relevant clusters. These integrated interventions could 
represent an interesting opportunity to plan future shelter 
assistance, in particular in the case of vulnerable families 
seeking return or integration into host communities.

2019 operations

Priority response activities

Shelter/NFI Cluster Objecive 1

• Emergency temporary shelter and emergency NFI 
assistance in case of conflict-related incidents;
• In-kind or cash-based winterisation assistance (solid fuel, 
heaters, winter clothing).


Shelter/NFI Cluster Objective 2

• Basic house rehabilitation (light and medium repairs);
• Winterisation of collective centres;
• Cash for rent.


Shelter/NFI Cluster Objective 3

• Heavy repairs and permanent housing (including 
reconstruction);
• NFI (furniture and equipment sets);
• Essential utility network repairs and connection.


People targeted and geographical scope

In 2019, 900 emergency shelter kits and 900 emergency NFI 
kits (1/3 in GCA and 2/3 in NGCA) will be prepositioned 
to complement the local authorities’ capacity to assist non-
displaced and evacuated people affected by conflict-related 
incidents in areas close to the ‘contact line’.

Shelter agencies will assist 7,400 non-displaced conflict-
affected HHs with the repair of their houses (46 per cent in 
GCA, within 20 kilometres of the ‘contact line’ and 54 per cent 
in NGCA).

During the 2019-20 winterisation response, cluster partners 
plan to assist 98,000 individuals: 57,000 of them (mainly non-
displaced but conflict-affected) with solid fuel and heaters 
(62 per cent in GCA, within 20 kilometres of the ‘contact line’ 
and 38 per cent in NGCA), 9,000 with winterisation cash 
grants (all in GCA) and 32,000 with warm clothing and other 
winterisation items (all in NGCA).

Response modalities

Based on the experience developed in almost five years 
of response, shelter repairs will be implemented in three 
different modalities: (1) in-kind provision of shelter material 
and recruitment of construction teams - local brigades or 
contractors - by the shelter agency (this will most likely 
remain also in 2019-20 the only modality applicable to 
NGCA); (2) a mixed modality in which part of the material is 
provided in-kind and the rest of the material and recruitment 
of construction teams are procured by the beneficiary through 
cash grants; (3) a full cash-based modality, in which the 
beneficiary receives a cash grant to procure all the material 
and labour necessary to complete the repair, while the shelter 
agency retains the role of providing technical support. 

The winterisation response will use the same three modalities 
as the shelter interventions, taking into account the same 
limitations on the use of cash in NGCA. In GCA, the cash 
modality will be largely used except for areas where there is 
no functioning market, or (in the case of solid fuel) where the 
access to the delivery area is problematic for normal suppliers.

Impact of humanitarian interventions

In this phase of the crisis, the decrease in the number of 
vulnerable families still in need of assistance for the repair of 
their homes in GCA is a clear indicator of the contribution 
provided by shelter agencies in almost five years of 
humanitarian response. In NGCA, the scale of the response 
has been much smaller and so has the impact on the needs. 
As a result, the balance between backlog and new damage on 
one side, and the pace of house repairs on the other side allow 
to predict that while in NGCA the work of humanitarian 
shelter agencies will still be required for several years to come, 
the bulk of the needs in GCA may be covered already in the 
course of 2019. 

The situation differs when it comes to winterisation. Here, 
the needs are periodical and are not one-off like the shelter 
needs. With time, the number of people who have exhausted 
their savings and as a direct result of the conflict are not able 
to prepare adequately for the cold season is likely to increase, 
especially in areas where governmental subsidies are not 
available, or where the supply of gas or centralised heating 
has been interrupted. Humanitarian agencies have played a 



central role in a type of assistance that can often be considered 
as life-saving - in some cases simply complementing the 
Government’s assistance by filling in the gaps; in other cases 
reaching out to vulnerable families where access was difficult.

Linkages and synergies with interventions outside the scope of the 
Humanitarian Response Plan

Reducing and ending needs

The Shelter/NFI Cluster was among the first clusters to take practical steps towards handing over its coordination 
functions to the Government. The finalisation of this transition is due to happen in 2019 and will likely go in parallel with 
the end of the bulk of the humanitarian shelter needs in GCA and an increasing presence of the Government in terms of 
winterisation assistance.

In case of the Shelter/NFI Cluster, two potential links to the development sector are represented by:

(a) The already mentioned multi-sector integrated projects (wherever the security situation allows, these projects may 
create the conditions for the return of displaced persons to their houses, completing the cycle of shelter assistance that 
started with the simple provision of emergency shelter kits for the temporary repair of houses damaged by the conflict and 
continued with the provision of house repairs); and 

(b) The housing projects for IDPs seeking integration into host communities (this type of intervention, however, is not 
really in line with what shelter agencies have been doing so far. There are differences in the target population (displaced 
people vs non-displaced and returnees), in the areas of intervention (safe areas away from the ‘contact line’ vs areas along 
the ‘contact line’) and the set of problems implied in the activities (one example: legal issues related to the tenure of new 
housing for displaced people VS. those related to the assistance to families who own the house which is being repaired).



EDUCATION

PEOPLE IN NEEDPEOPLE TARGETED# OF PROJECTSREQUIREMENTS (US$)# OF PARTNERS66.5M50.7M0.2M
EDUCATION OBJECTIVE 1

1 Improve access to safe schools (education facilities) that provide quality 
education services to conflict affected learners in a protective learning 
environment


RELATES TO CO2 

EDUCATION OBJECTIVE 2

2 Improve the quality of teaching and learning for conflict affected and 
vulnerable children and teachers. 


RELATES TO CO2 

Cluster multi-year strategy

The overall goal of the education response is to ensure access to safe and quality education for children and adolescents affected 
by the crisis in Ukraine prioritising those who are most vulnerable and strengthen the capacity of the education system 
and education facilities (including schools, kindergartens, vocational schools, afterschool education facilities, orphanages and 
higher education facilities) to deliver a timely, coordinated and evidence-based response to those in need.

Response approach

The Ukraine Education Cluster partners 
will respond to the needs of children, 
youth, educators and parents with essential 
interventions that improve access to and 
quality of education services. Safe and 
protective education facilities staffed 
with educators with the ability to address 
immediate and cumulative impacts of 
the conflict will foster resilience, social 
cohesion and recovery in conflict-affected 
communities. Teachers and staff will receive 
specialised training in conflict-sensitive 
education, safe school concepts, distance 
learning and modern distance learning 
methods to address sustained cumulative 
impact of nearly five years of the conflict.

Education interventions will prioritise most 
vulnerable and marginalised girls and boys in 
GCA and NGCA, including orphans, children 
living in poverty, children who experienced 
severe traumas, children with disabilities, 
including children living within 20 kilometres 
of the ‘contact line’ on both sides. 

Families trapped in poverty due to economic 
decline and unable to meet education costs 
will receive support in education supplies and 
school expenses. 

The Ukraine Education Cluster will work 
with partners, the Ministry of Education 
and Science and local authorities to 
support policy and advocacy efforts 
aimed at the Government’s endorsement 
and implementation of the ‘Safe Schools 
Declaration’, representing a political 
commitment to support the protection of 
schools during armed conflict.

Mainstreaming of cross-cutting issues

The Ukraine Education Cluster leads in 
the field have a particular responsibility for 
ensuring that humanitarian actors working 
in education remain actively engaged in 
protecting affected population groups and 
addressing both specific vulnerabilities of 
men, women, boys and girls and vulnerable 
groups respecting the “do-no-harm” 
principle in planning and implementing 
interventions. We should remain actively 

2019 REQUIREMENT(US$)

6.5M CRITICALREQUIREMENT6.5MTOTAL 
REQUIREMENT
53%
53% 
0.4M 17K 0.1M 0.2M 
0.1M 15K 27K 18K91 | 9| 0%
79 | 21 | 0%
PEOPLE IN NEED 
PEOPLE TARGETED% female% children, 
adults, 
the elderly*
BY SEX & AGEGCA(0-5 km area along the 
‘contact line’) 
(5-20 km area along the 
‘contact line’) 
(Excluding the 20 km 
area along 
‘contact line’)
GCARest of GCANGCABY GEOGRAPHICAL PRIORITY 
*Children (<18 years old), adults (18-59 years), elderly (60+ years)
CONTACT

Jasminka Milovanovic

Acting Education Cluster 
Coordinator

Jasminka.Milovanovic@
savethechildren.org

.



engaged in addressing cross-cutting concerns and issues 
such as the gender and age-sensitive planning, analysing and 
mitigating risks in order to ensure equal participation and fair 
distribution of humanitarian assistance. Respecting the views 
and capacities of those affected by the conflict and considering 
accountability and resilience of the affected population to 
reduce vulnerability are important dimensions to ensure 
appropriate responses, which have been ignored too often. 

The Ukraine Education Cluster is facilitating a process aimed 
at ensuring integration of agreed priority cross-cutting issues 
in sectoral needs assessment, analysis, planning, monitoring 
and response (e.g. age, diversity, gender etc.) which includes 
development of appropriate strategies to address these issues.

The Global Education Cluster also liaises with the Global 
Partnership for Education (GPE) and other key actors on 
bridging humanitarian and development coordination and 
financing. Key development and humanitarian partnerships, 
agencies, organisations, donors, advocates and other 
actors are exploring new options and ways of working to 
address education in emergencies, protracted crises, and 
recovery situations more holistically and comprehensively. 
This includes consideration of measures to bridge the 
humanitarian and development divide, in terms of planning, 
coordination and financing.

Greater efficiencies over a multi-year period

Given the protracted nature of the crisis in Ukraine our 
response in the education sector requires a multi-year 
strategy. Safe schools and learning centres as focal points in 
the conflict-affected communities are in need of ongoing 
support from humanitarian actors and, were feasible, recovery 
and development actors over extended periods of time. Multi-
year planning in education is particularly needed to address 
systemic issues caused by the conflict such as fragmentation 
of the pre-conflict education system as well as limited 
recognition of the education certificates obtained in NGCA.

The Ukraine Education Cluster and its partners will work 
closely with the Protection Cluster (including Mine Action 
and Child Protection sub-clusters) to promote integration of 
response. Schools can serve as unique entry points to provide 
children and teachers with holistic emergency response, 
including access to education as well as a safe and protective 
environment, where immediate and cumulative effects of the 
conflict-related stress and trauma can be addressed. 

The Ukraine Education Cluster partners together with WASH 
and other clusters will ensure that the needs for child friendly 
sanitation facilities for girls and boys are met, education 
facilities are benefiting from the continuous water and 
electricity supply and acute winterisation needs are addressed.

The Ukraine Education Cluster will strengthen coordination, 
response and preparedness capacities of the Ministry of 
Education and Science and local authorities through capacity 
building, advocacy and elaboration of policy for school 
certification and safe schools. 

2019 operations

Priority response activities

The quality of teaching and learning for conflict-affected 
and vulnerable children and teachers will be improved by 
provision of life skills education and protective, non-formal 
education activities through after school activities, summer 
camps and other learning opportunities. Teachers and parents 
will be trained on identified priority topics, including conflict-
sensitive education, distance learning, inclusive education, 
psychological first aid and stress management/selfcare. Older 
children and youth will be supported with the transition from 
schools to the job market, vocational or higher education via 
respective information campaigns and targeted consultations.

The Ukraine Education Cluster partners will improve access 
to safe schools that provide quality education services to 
conflict-affected learners by distributing required equipment 
and conducting conflict-related repairs and rehabilitation of 
education facilities. They will also respond to new damage due 
to ongoing hostilities in case of need. In order to make the 
vulnerable schools a safer place for children and educators, 
the Ukraine Education Cluster partners in partnership with 
the Protection and other clusters will respond to school-
related safety and security concerns such as threat of UXOs, 
landmines and military activities in close proximity to 
education facilities. 

People targeted and geographical scope

Education Cluster partners are targeting a total of 170,000 
conflict-affected and vulnerable children and teachers with 
interventions aimed at improving access to safe education 
facilities and improving the quality of their teaching and 
learning. Sixty-four per cent or 109,000 children and teachers 
are in NGCA, where many critical needs in education remain 
unaddressed (e.g. some education facilities damaged on the 
onset of the conflict have never been repaired) and where 
additional layers of needs related to formal recognition of 
studies in NGCA exist.

Out of a total of 60,700 people targeted by HRP interventions 
in GCA, 27,200 live in the area between five and 20 kilometres 
within the ‘contact line’, while 18,400 live outside this area. 
Boys and girls living in GCA more than five kilometres 
away from the ‘contact line’ are among the most vulnerable 
population groups. Many of them are from IDP families 
or families who are impoverished due to economic decline 
caused by the conflict.

Seventy-nine per cent or more than ¾ of those beneficiaries 
are children, while 21 per cent are adults. Adult beneficiaries 
are primarily teachers who will be trained on some of the 
already identified priority topics and will be capacitated to 
transfer vital life skills to their students using formal and non-
formal education modalities.

Response modalities

Small scale rehabilitation of damaged education facilities as 
well as procurement and distribution of required equipment, 
individual education and early childhood development kits 

EDUCATION

PROTECTION



will be done using local resources and engaging with local 
humanitarian partners, whenever possible.

Capacity building for teachers and local authorities will be 
conducted primarily utilising the expertise of national trainers 
who were trained on the basis of the world’s best practices and 
methodologies. 

While none of the education partners have used cash transfers 
in the education response during 2018, the Education Cluster 
will continue to explore and encourage the innovative use of 
cash transfers, whenever appropriate. Support to vulnerable 
families with learning materials via conditional and restricted 
cash grants in GCA can be seen as an entry point for 
application of this modality.

Impact of humanitarian interventions

Since the start of the conflict, the Ukraine Education Cluster 
partners have repaired and equipped hundreds of education 
facilities, trained tens of thousands of teachers and parents on 
identified priority topics and provided hundreds of thousands 
of children with education and early childhood development 
kits as well as non-formal education programmes. Those 
interventions have made education facilities safer spaces for 
children that provide needed structure and routine critical to 
coping with psychosocial distress and restoring normality to 
their lives.

Some education interventions demonstrate life-saving value, 
providing critical support to schools which are at risk of being 
shelled. The example is Svitlodarsk school #11 (Donetska 
GCA) which was damaged in May 2018. More than 60 
windows equipped with an anti-blast film were damaged 
when artillery/mortar shell landed in the school yard with 
over 400 children and teachers during classes. No-one was 
injured during the incident. Due to constrained access many 
of the education sector interventions were limited in NGCA 
and many conflict-related needs in the education sector still 
haven’t been addressed with new challenges adding to them 
each year. Education partners look forward to further opening 
NGCA for humanitarian interventions in 2019-2020.

Linkages and synergies with interventions outside the scope of the 
Humanitarian Response Plan

Reducing and ending needs

The Ukraine Education Cluster will continue to collaborate closely with a range of humanitarian as well as recovery and 
development actors operating in conflict-affected areas. 

In order to sustain effective and cohesive education sector work, coordination should continue and develop beyond the 
current modalities and structures of the Ukraine Education Cluster, predominantly through a range of interventions 
implemented by non-humanitarian international partners, civil society organisations and the Government. The process 
of establishing a sector coordination mechanism is being led by the Ministry of Education and Science in Ukraine that is 
supposed to incorporate humanitarian, recovery and development work. 

Following the establishment of the coordination mechanism some cluster functions will be handed over to the 
Government while others which require maintaining structural link between GCA and NGCA will remain covered by the 
cluster or handed over to lead agencies or other actors. Despite the fact that the coordination mechanism implies certain 
expertise in dealing with a variety of education-related tasks, there is a need to build technical and functional capacity of 
government actors who will be tasked with education interventions within the cluster functions that will be handed over 
to the Government. This process requires an open and transparent dialogue between the Ukraine Education Cluster and 
Government counterparts on possible modalities of the handover, including discussions on different types of support the 
Government would need to effectively continue working on education activities within the cluster portfolio.



COMMON SERVICES AND SUPPORT

# OF PROJECTSREQUIREMENTS (US$)# OF PARTNERS45.0M124
CSS OBJECTIVE 1

1 Adapt coordination mechanisms to the 
context and support effective, coherent 
and principled delivery of humanitarian 
assistance


RELATES TO CO1 ,CO2 ,CO3 

CSS OBJECTIVE 2

2Guide humanitarian action by joint strategic 
planning, improved information management 
and needs assessment, and respond based 
on prioritized needs, including preparedness and 
resilience aspectse.

RELATES TO CO1 ,CO2 ,CO3 

CSS OBJECTIVE 3

3Ensure predictable, timely and sustained 
humanitarian financing based on priority needs

 RELATES TO CO1 ,CO2 ,CO3 

Cluster multi-year strategy

The common support service providers in Ukraine aim to facilitate principled, timely, effective and efficient humanitarian 
action at national, oblast and local levels to address the most urgent needs of people affected by the crisis.

Response approach

The existing humanitarian coordination 
structure will continue to ensure an effective, 
agile, and principled multi-sectoral response 
to address the protection and assistance 
needs of those impacted. Common services 
will facilitate inter-agency and inter-sectoral 
vulnerability analysis to ensure the response 
is evidence-based, adjusting operational 
response to the context. Based on the needs 
of humanitarian partners, common services 
will adapt to address operational difficulties 
on the ground. Inter-agency preparedness 
and contingency planning will be supported. 
Common support services will be provided 
in all geographical areas, including NGCA, 
through a sustainable presence in field and 
Kyiv locations, covering areas where there is 
no office presence.

Mainstreaming of cross-cutting issues

Cross-cutting issues will be mainstreamed 
into the planning and implementation of the 
response through advocacy, coordination, 
information-management, data analysis 
and policy. OCHA as the Secretariat for 
inter-cluster coordination will facilitate the 
analysis on gender and age sensitive planning 
for proposal submission to the MYHRP. 
Accountability to Affected Population 
(AAP) as an inter-cluster component of all 
humanitarian programming will be ensured 
through joint efforts among all partners 
implementing projects in the eastern part 
of the country. Ensuring the prevention of 
sexual abuse and exploitation (PSEA) will be 
supported by a PSEA Task Force, accountable 
to the HC and HCT. The Task Force’s purpose 
is to guide and support HCT-led joint 
actions to protect beneficiaries from SEA and 
enhance the collective capacity of the agencies 
and affected populations to prevent and 
respond to reports of SEA committed by aid 
workers in Ukraine.

Greater efficiencies over a multi-year 
period

There are clear commitments to improve 
the efficiency and impact of coordination 
activities by both operational partners and 
coordination service providers. Based on 
the outcomes of the annual coordination 
review in 2018, initiated by the Humanitarian 
Coordinator, further streamlining will be 
ensured. 

Enhanced inter-cluster coordination through 
more field-based presence, joint advocacy 
efforts and resource mobilisation will take 
place. Partners will be able to use the newly 
developed inter-agency rapid assessment tool, 
should the security situation deteriorate, and 
respond to humanitarian needs by means of 
rapidly enhanced inter-cluster coordination 
through more field-based presence, joint 
advocacy efforts and resource mobilisation. 
REACH will ensure sex and age disaggregated 
data analysis in all phases of the assessment 
process. While the support services have 
already worked in Ukraine for more than 
three years, the multi-year HRP will help 
partners build sustainable programmes 
to build capacity among governmental 
counterparts and local actors. 

2019 operations

Priority response activities 

HCT and ICCG-led advocacy efforts; effective 
allocations of financial resources to meet 
the most urgent humanitarian needs; and 

2019 REQUIREMENT(US$)

4.5M CRITICALREQUIREMENT5.0 MTOTAL 
REQUIREMENT
CONTACT

Ivane Bochorishvili


Deputy Head of Office/Inter-
Cluster Coordinator, OCHA
bochorishvili@un.org

.



operational coordination support to implementing actors will 
be priority activities. A few new features will be implemented 
over the course of 2019, including a joint RCO-OCHA 
information management unit. This unit will strengthen the 
joint capacity in terms of assessment and monitoring of both 
recovery and humanitarian activities conducted by all actors 
in eastern Ukraine and has been based on best practices in 
other humanitarian contexts. It will not only facilitate inter-
sector vulnerability analysis, it will also establish appropriate 
links and ensure information-sharing between humanitarian 
and development or recovery activities. 

People targeted and geographical scope 

The coordination services are in place to ensure proper 
coordination among actors working within the geographical 
area as prioritised in the 2019-2020 HRP. Based on the 
estimation of agencies providing humanitarian assistance in 
Ukraine during 2018, coordination services will be provided 
to more than 138 agencies. The indirect beneficiaries are the 
3.5 million Ukrainians in Donetska and Luhanska oblasts 
who have been targeted for humanitarian assistance in 2019. 
While the geographical focus remains on the two conflict-
affected oblasts in eastern Ukraine as per the prioritised 
criteria of the geographical scope, coordination services will 
also be provided in other locations, including Kyiv and other 
hubs as deemed appropriate by humanitarian partners. When 
required, ad-hoc coordination structures can be set up in 
new hubs. Presence and facilitation of coordination meetings 
in the already established hubs in Kramatorsk, Sloviansk, 
Sievierodonetsk, Mariupol, Donetsk and Luhansk, which are 
the more populated cities in the area closer to the ‘contact line’ 
will be maintained in 2019.

Response modalities

Modalities include on-site meetings, advocacy activities, 
inter-agency information management services and other 
support activities as deemed necessary by the implementing 
actors. OCHA and UNDP will continue to facilitate the 
Humanitarian-Development Nexus (HDN) working group 
to establish a proper link between relevant actors, including 
governmental counterparts. The NGO Forum will continue 
to facilitate coordination among national and international 
NGOs to ensure coherent and well-informed decision-making 
at all levels. REACH in cooperation with OCHA will continue 
to facilitate coordination and conduct assessments that help 
humanitarian actors to adjust their response to the identified 
needs of local population. INSO will provide safety and 
risk management services that help partners develop their 
operational capacity and improve access. Based on operational 
needs, the modalities and ways of facilitating support services 
may change to ensure the activities improve cohesion and 
build bridges between all actors working to improve the 
situation in eastern Ukraine. 

Impact of humanitarian interventions

In 2018 alone, joint efforts by the inter-cluster coordination 
structure developed an inter-agency rapid assessment tools 
which can be used by all partners, including local authorities, 
to assess the impact of a local flare-up and the resulting 
humanitarian needs. The established HDN working group 
continued its efforts to find innovative links to ensure that 
there were no overlaps or gaps in the activities implemented 
in eastern Ukraine. Meanwhile, support service partners have 
learnt from the almost five years of operation and adjusted 
their work to the context in which partners operate. Pilot 
projects which did not work well in the Ukrainian context 
were replaced with more fit-for-purpose modalities and 
appropriate measures were taken to address those potential 
obstacles in coordination of preparedness and response 
activities. 

Linkages and synergies with interventions outside the scope of the 
Humanitarian Response Plan

Reducing and ending needs

The multi-year strategy for 2019-2020 lays the foundation for further strengthening the synergies between the 
humanitarian, development and recovery actors as well as with the local authorities in both Donetska and Luhanska 
oblasts. Through the established general coordination mechanisms, actors operating in eastern Ukraine participate in 
regular coordination meetings, briefings, presentations and other ad-hoc meetings to keep everyone informed about the 
ongoing and planned activities. The newly established information management unit, co-hosted by the RC office and 
OCHA, will work closely with the MTOT data platform which focuses on socio-economic indicators in the eastern part of 
the country. The goal is to eventually hand over this function to the Government. Data collected through comprehensive 
REACH assessments will help inform humanitarian, development and Government actors on the needs of the local 
population and allow them to adjust their response activities accordingly. The NGO Forum strives to empower national 
NGOs, which are due to eventually take over the work of many international actors providing assistance. INSO, working 
closely with the local authorities and security actors, serves as the direct link to humanitarian and development actors in 
terms of security concerns. Efforts are already being made to prepare local authorities to take over some of the functions, 
which have been carried out by support service providers in the past few years

.





HRP

CONTRIBUTING TO THE HUMANITARIAN 
RESPONSE PLAN

To see the Ukraine’s Humanitarian 
Needs Overview, Humanitarian Response Plan 
and monitoring reports, and donate directly to 
organizations participating to the plan, please visit: 

https://www.
humanitarianresponse.info/
operations/ukraine

https://reports.unocha.org/
country/ukraine/

DONATING THROUGH THE CENTRAL 
EMERGENCY RESPONSE FUND (CERF)

CERF provides rapid initial funding for 
life-saving actions at the onset of emergencies and for 
poorly funded, essential humanitarian operations in 
protracted crises. The CERF receives contributions 
from various donors – mainly governments, but 
also private companies, foundations, charities and 
individuals – which are combined into a single fund. 
This is used for crises anywhere in the world. Find out 
more about the CERF and how to donate by visiting 
the CERF website: 

https://cerf.un.org/donate

IN-KIND RELIEF AID

The United Nations urges donors to make cash rather than in-kind donations, for maximum speed and 
flexibility, and to ensure the aid materials that are most needed are the ones delivered. If you can make only 
in-kind contributions in response to disasters and emergencies, please contact:

logik@un.org

REGISTERING AND RECOGNIZING YOUR CONTRIBUTIONS

OCHA manages the Financial Tracking Service (FTS), which records all reported humanitarian contributions 
(cash, in-kind, multilateral and bilateral) to emergencies. Its purpose is to give credit and visibility 
to donors for their generosity and to show the total amount of funding and expose gaps in humanitarian 
plans. Please report yours to FTS, either by email to fts@un.org or through the online contribution report 
form at http://fts.unocha.org



PART III: ANNEXES
Cluster objectives, activities, indicators and targets 51 ........ 
66Participating organizations and funding requirements .... 
68What if ... we fail to respond? ........................................... 
PART III: ANNEXES 





EDUCATION OBJECTIVES, ACTIVITIES, INDICATORS AND TARGETS 

 Education Objective 1: Improve access to safe schools (education facilities) that provide quality education services to conflict-affected 
learners in a protective learning environment
TARGET

ACTIVITY

LOCATION

INDICATOR

IN NEED

BASELINE

TOTAL

NGCA

GCA: 0-5 KM 
AREA ALONG 
THE CL

GCA: 5-20KM 
AREA ALONG 
THE CL

REST OF GCA

Education Objective 1:

 
336,000 


n/a

 
36,800 


 
17,300 


 
8,500 


 
9,000 


 
2,000 


Conflict-related repair and 
rehabilitation of education facilities; 
construction of additional learning 
spaces for vulnerable children in 
need

Luhanska and Donetska oblasts 
(GCA and NGCA)

# of education facilities repaired and 
rehabilitated

 220 

n/a

 115 

 59 

 22 

 24 

 10 

# of girls and boys benefiting from 
repaired education facilities or 
additional learning spaces

 
56,400 


n/a

 
27,500 


 
15,200 


 
5,500 


 
5,500 


 
1,300 


Procurement and distribution of 
equipment to conflict-affected 
education facilities

Luhanska and Donetska oblasts 
(GCA and NGCA)

# of girls and boys benefiting from 
provision of equipment to education 
facilities

 
336,000 


n/a

 
30,700 


 
15,400 


 
7,000 


 
7,300 


 
1,000 






.

CLUSTER OBJECTIVES, ACTIVITIES, INDICATORS AND TARGETS FOR 2019

COLLECTIVE OUTCOMES

 1. 
Affected people have access to adequate protection and means of livelihoods

 2. 
Affected people have improved access to quality and affordable services

 3. 
Affected people have consistent access to critical civilian structures

A 2019-2020 monitoring framework of Collective Outcomes will be developed by the HCT in early 2019. The present document will be updated to include it.

Relates to CO2 



TARGET

ACTIVITY

LOCATION

INDICATOR

IN NEED

BASELINE

TOTAL

NGCA

GCA: 0-5 KM 
AREA ALONG 
THE CL

GCA: 5-20KM 
AREA ALONG 
THE CL

REST OF GCA

Support to distance learning 
programmes/modalities

Luhanska and Donetska oblasts 
(GCA and NGCA)

# of girls and boys benefiting from 
distance learning programmes/
modalities supported by Education 
Cluster partners

 
19,000 


n/a

 
5,800 


 
1,900 


 
1,500 


 
1,700 


 
700 






TARGET

ACTIVITY

LOCATION

INDICATOR

IN NEED

BASELINE

TOTAL

NGCA

GCA: 0-5 KM 
AREA ALONG 
THE CL

GCA: 5-20KM 
AREA ALONG 
THE CL

REST OF GCA

Education Objective 2:

737,000

-

 
103,000 


 
63,400 


 
12,200 


 
14,400 


 
13,000 


Supply of education, ECD, or 
recreation kits and distribution of 
cash or vouchers for education, ECD, 
or recreation kits

Luhanska and Donetska oblasts 
(GCA and NGCA)

# of girls and boys benefiting 
from supplied education, ECD 
and recreation kits or related cash 
interventions

 
104,100 


0

 
24,400 


 
13,000 


 
5,600 


 
5,200 


 600 

Provision of life skills education 
and protective, non-formal 
education activities (including 
MRE) through after school activities, 
summer camps and other learning 
opportunities

Luhanska and Donetska oblasts 
(GCA and NGCA)

# of girls and boys benefiting from 
provision of life skills and non-formal 
education (including MRE)

 
670,000 


0

 
47,600 


 
43,400 


 
2,000 


 
1,500 


 
700 


Capacity building of teachers 
and parents on identified priority 
topics (i.e. psychological first aid 
(PFA), stress management/self-
care, psychosocial issues, inclusive 
education, conflict-sensitive 
education and distance learning)

Luhanska and Donetska oblasts 
(GCA and NGCA)

# of male and female teachers and 
parents trained

 
67,000 


0

 
24,600 


 
3,500 


 
4,600 


 
6,800 


 
9,700 


# of girls and boys benefiting from 
trained teachers

 
670,000 


0

 19,300 


 
7,500 


 
4,800 


 
5,800 


 
1,200 






.

CLUSTER OBJECTIVES, ACTIVITIES, INDICATORS AND TARGETS FOR 2019

 Education Objective 2: Improve the quality of teaching and learning for conflict-affected and vulnerable children and teachers 

Relates to CO2 



TARGET

ACTIVITY

LOCATION

INDICATOR

IN NEED

BASELINE

TOTAL

NGCA

GCA: 0-5 KM 
AREA ALONG 
THE CL

GCA: 5-20KM 
AREA ALONG 
THE CL

REST OF GCA

Support to children and youth with 
the transition from schools to the 
jobs market, vocational or higher 
education

Luhanska and Donetska oblasts 
(GCA and NGCA)

# of male and female children and 
youth provided with consultations 
or skills training with regard to 
their transition to the job market, 
vocational or higher education

 
64,500 


0

 
24,900 


 
16,100 


 
1,800 


 
2,800 


 
4,200 






FOOD SECURITY AND LIVELIHOODS OBJECTIVES, ACTIVITIES, INDICATORS AND TARGETS 

 Food Security and Livelihoods Objective 1: Most vulnerable conflict-affected groups have immediate access to food
TARGET

ACTIVITY

LOCATION

INDICATOR

IN NEED

BASELINE

TOTAL

NGCA

GCA: 0-5 KM 
AREA ALONG 
THE CL

GCA: 5-20KM 
AREA ALONG 
THE CL

REST OF GCA

Food Security and Livelihoods Objective 1:

- 

-

-

-

-

-

-

Provision of cash transfers/vouchers

Luhanska and Donetska oblasts 
(GCA and NGCA) and IDPs 
residing elsewhere in Ukraine

# of individuals receiving cash 
transfers/ vouchers to improve their 
immediate access to food

267,000*

n/a

59,510

22,110

19,500

8,800

9,100

Provision of in-kind food assistance

# of individuals receiving food 
assistance to ensure their 
immediate access to food

-

-

-

-

-

-

-





 Food Security and Livelihoods Objective 2: Affected populations improve food security status through rehabilitated agriculture and/or 
increased agricultural production for sustainable livelihoods 
TARGET

ACTIVITY

LOCATION

INDICATOR

IN NEED

BASELINE

TOTAL

NGCA

GCA: 0-5 KM 
AREA ALONG 
THE CL

GCA: 5-20KM 
AREA ALONG 
THE CL

REST OF GCA

Food Security and Livelihoods Objective 2:

-

-

HHs**

-

-

-

-

Provision of agricultural support 
(including trainings and grants); 
rehabilitation/construction of 
agricultural assets

Luhanska and Donetska oblasts 
(GCA and NGCA) and IDPs 
residing elsewhere in Ukraine

# of households benefiting from 
agricultural supports 

60,000

n/a

5,530

750

2,540

6,839

832





.

Relates to CO2 

Relates to CO1 

 CO3 

* 
825,000 
people 
(general 
population, 
including 
IDPs) 
are 
food 
insecure 
in 
eastern 
Ukraine, 
in 
addition 
to 
37,000 
IDPs 
residing 
in 
other 
oblasts, 
and 
in 
need 
of some 
type 
of 
food 
security 
assistance 
- 
however, 
267,000 
(258,000 
people 
in 
Donbas 
with 
194,000 
in 
NGCA 
and 
64,000 
in 
GCA 
plus 
9,000 
IDPs 
outside 
of 
Donbas) 
are 
in 
urgent 
need 
of 
immediate 
food 
assistance

** 
The 
breakdown 
by 
location 
shows 
the 
provisioned 
number 
of 
targeted 
individuals, 
while 
the 
total 
target 
value 
shows 
the 
number 
of 
targeted 
households



 Food Security and Livelihoods Objective 3: Affected populations have access to employment and income generating opportunities 
through rehabilitation/building sustainable livelihood assets
TARGET

ACTIVITY

LOCATION

INDICATOR

IN NEED

BASELINE

TOTAL

NGCA

GCA: 0-5 KM 
AREA ALONG 
THE CL

GCA: 5-20KM 
AREA ALONG 
THE CL

REST OF GCA

Food Security and Livelihoods Objective 3:

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

Provision of employment and 
income generation support 
(including trainings and grants); 
rehabilitation/ construction of non-
agricultural assets

Luhanska and Donetska oblasts 
(GCA and NGCA) and IDPs 
residing elsewhere in Ukraine

# of individuals receiving livelihoods 
support

387,000*

n/a

7,150

2,750

495

1,255

2,650





HEALTH AND NUTRITION OBJECTIVES, ACTIVITIES, INDICATORS AND TARGETS 

 Health and Nutrition Objective 1: Conflict-affected population access quality life-saving and essential health care services, including 
psychosocial and mental health support
TARGET

ACTIVITY

LOCATION

INDICATOR

IN NEED

BASELINE

TOTAL

NGCA

GCA: 0-5 KM 
AREA ALONG 
THE CL

GCA: 5-20KM 
AREA ALONG 
THE CL

REST OF GCA

Health and Nutrition Objective 1:

Total # of consultations

1,300,000

0

201,146

-

-

-

-

Provision of direct lifesaving 
and primary health care services 
(through fixed and mobile clinics) 
including integrated Sexual and 
Reproductive Health services and 
Mental health and Psychosocial 
support

Luhanska and Donetska oblasts 
(GCA and NGCA) and areas along 
the ‘contact line’

# of people benefiting from direct 
health services provision

-

-

185,010

-

-

-

-

Provision of financial support to 
vulnerable affected population 
through cash and vouchers for 
healthcare expenses

Luhanska and Donetska oblasts 
(GCA and NGCA) and areas along 
the ‘contact line’

# of people benefiting from cash/
voucher assistance (for health)

-

-

16,136

-

-

-


-






CLUSTER OBJECTIVES, ACTIVITIES, INDICATORS AND TARGETS FOR 2019

Relates to CO1 

Relates to CO2 

* 
FSLC 
estimates 
that 
in 
eastern 
Ukraine 
up 
to 
376,000 
unemployed 
working 
age 
people 
(15-70 
years) 
are 
in 
need 
of 
livelihoods 
assistance 
(158,000 
in 
GCA 
and 218,000 
in 
NGCA). 
Of 
these, 
FSLC 
estimates 
a 
total 
of 
357,000 
unemployed 
people 
to 
be 
in 
the 
most 
immediate 
need 
of 
support. 
In 
additoin, 
30,000 
IDPs 
outside 
of 
Donbas 
are 
in 
accute 
need 
of 
livelihoods 
support.





TARGET

ACTIVITY

LOCATION

INDICATOR

IN NEED

BASELINE

TOTAL

NGCA

GCA: 0-5 KM 
AREA ALONG 
THE CL

GCA: 5-20KM 
AREA ALONG 
THE CL

REST OF GCA

Health and Nutrition Objective 2:

-

-

335,913

-

-

-

-

Restoration and/or rehabilitation 
of disrupted health services and 
infrastructure

Luhanska and Donetska oblasts 
(GCA and NGCA) and areas 
along the ‘contact line’

# of health facilities supported

-

-

198

-

-

-

-

Procurement, pre-positioning and 
distribution of medical supplies, 
essential medications and 
equipment through established and 
mobile healthcare services

Luhanska and Donetska oblasts 
(GCA and NGCA) and areas 
along the ‘contact line’

# of health facilities supported

-

-

198

-

-

-

-

Direct support to laboratories 
(including blood bank services) to 
improve availability, quality and 
safety standards.

Luhanska and Donetska oblasts 
(GCA and NGCA) and areas 
along the ‘contact line’

# of laboratories supported

-

-

6

-

-

-

-



Health care and nutrition education 
to improve and update knowledge 
and skills of healthcare providers

Luhanska and Donetska oblasts 
(GCA and NGCA) and areas 
along the ‘contact line’

# of healthcare providers reached

-

-

12,475

-

-

-

-



Health and nutrition education, 
awareness, social mobilization 
and advocacy activities for affected 
population.

Luhanska and Donetska oblasts 
(GCA and NGCA) and areas 
along the ‘contact line’

# of people reached

-

-

323,438

-

-

-

-





Relates to CO2 

 CO3 

 Health and Nutrition Objective 2: Improve capacity and sustainability of healthcare services for conflict-affected population



PROTECTION OBJECTIVES, ACTIVITIES, INDICATORS AND TARGETS 

 Protection Objective 1: Strengthen protection for persons of concern, including prevention and mitigation of rights violations

TARGET

ACTIVITY

LOCATION

INDICATOR

IN NEED

BASELINE

TOTAL

NGCA

GCA: 0-5 KM 
AREA ALONG 
THE CL

GCA: 5-20KM 
AREA ALONG 
THE CL

REST OF GCA

Protection Objective 1:

3,100,000

-

1,140,000

-

-

-

-

Conduct Protection Monitoring 
Missions

Nationwide

# of protection monitoring missions 
conducted and recorded

n/a

n/a

7,700

-

-

-

-

Information Dissemination (persons 
reached) 

Nationwide

# of persons receiving information 
on trafficking, GBV risks, prevention, 
referrals, and availability of life-savin 
services, MRE Information, HLP, 
documentation, IDP residence 
registration, social benefits, legal 
assistance or entitlements.

3,100,000

-

1,140,000

-

-

-

-

Mine Risk Education (persons 
reached)

Luhansk and Donetsk

# of persons receiving Mine Risk 
Education through MRE awareness 
sessions

860,000

-

82,000

-

-

-

-





 
Protection Objective 2: People of concern benefit from full and non-discriminatory access to essential services and enjoyment of their rights, 
with particular attention to the most vulnerable 
TARGET

ACTIVITY

LOCATION

INDICATOR

IN NEED

BASELINE

TOTAL

NGCA

GCA: 0-5 KM 
AREA ALONG 
THE CL

GCA: 5-20KM 
AREA ALONG 
THE CL

REST OF GCA

Protection Objective 2

1,800,000

-

400,000

-

-

-

-

Provision of targeted essential 
services and individual assistance 
(incl. cash)

 Luhansk and Donetsk

# women, men, boys and girls with 
access to essential services (including 
PSS, Legal assistance, GBV, Mine 
victim assistance, etc.) and individual 
protection assistance (incl. cash)

1,800,000

-

400,000

-

-

-

--





 

CLUSTER OBJECTIVES, ACTIVITIES, INDICATORS AND TARGETS FOR 2019

Relates to CO1 

Relates to CO2 



 Protection Objective 3: Improve social 
cohesion and resilience of conflict-affected people; support people of concern in identifying durable solutions
TARGET

ACTIVITY

LOCATION

INDICATOR

IN NEED

BASELINE

TOTAL

NGCA

GCA: 0-5 KM 
AREA ALONG 
THE CL

GCA: 5-20KM 
AREA ALONG 
THE CL

REST OF GCA

Protection Objective 3:

 

1,300,000

-

135,000

-

-

-

-

Promoting peaceful coexistence & 
durable solutions

Nationwide

# of local and displaced women, 
men, girls and boys supported 
through peaceful coexistence/peace-
building/social cohesion projects, or 
community support initiatives. 

1,300,000

-

135,000

-

-

-

-





SHELTER/NFI OBJECTIVES, ACTIVITIES, INDICATORS AND TARGETS 

 Shelter/NFI Objective 1:Address essential shelter and NFI needs of the most vulnerable IDPs and conflict affected population through 
monetised/in-kind assistance and contingency 
TARGET

ACTIVITY

LOCATION

INDICATOR

IN NEED

BASELINE

TOTAL

NGCA

GCA: 0-5 KM 
AREA ALONG 
THE CL

GCA: 5-20KM 
AREA ALONG 
THE CL

REST OF GCA

Shelter/NFI Objective 1:

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

Acute emergency shelter

# HHs receiving acute emergency 
shelter support

-

-

1,050

-

-

-

-

Solid fuel & heater distribution

# HHs receiving solid fuel and heater 
support for winter

-

-

19,350

-

-

-

-

NFI distribution

# individuals receiving clothing sets 

-

--

0

-

-

-

-

NFI distribution

# HHs receiving general NFIs

 -

 -

3,700

-

-

-

-

Winterization cash grant transfers

# HHs receiving winterization cash 
grants

-

-

4,114

-

-

-

-





Relates to CO2 

 CO3 

Relates to CO3 



 Shelter/NFI Objective 2: Contribute to adequate transitional solutions (monetised or in-kind) related to shelter and NFI needs meeting 
minimal international and national shelter standards
TARGET

ACTIVITY

LOCATION

INDICATOR

IN NEED

BASELINE

TOTAL

NGCA

GCA: 0-5 KM 
AREA ALONG 
THE CL

GCA: 5-20KM 
AREA ALONG 
THE CL

REST OF GCA

Shelter/NFI Objective 2:

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

Light and medium repairs

# HHs supported with light and 
medium repairs 

-

-

7,100

-

-

-

-

Collective Centre winterisation

# individuals living in non-specialized 
Collective Centres receiving 
winterization support 

-

-

50,200

-

-

-

-

Cash for rent or other shelter-linked 
monetized solutions

# HHs receiving cash grants for rental 
accommodation or other monetized 
shelter solutions

-

-

120

-

-

-

-

Medium-Heavy Repairs

# of HHs supported with medium-
heavy repairs (i.e. no foundational 
elements)

 -

 -

0

-

-

-

-





 Shelter/NFI Objective 3: Provide/upgrade permanent shelter solutions for the most vulnerable conflict-affected population
TARGET

ACTIVITY

LOCATION

INDICATOR

IN NEED

BASELINE

TOTAL

NGCA

GCA: 0-5 KM 
AREA ALONG 
THE CL

GCA: 5-20KM 
AREA ALONG 
THE CL

REST OF GCA

Shelter/NFI Objective 3:

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

Structural repairs (“heavy repairs")

# HHs supported with structural 
repairs

 -

-

811

-

-

-

-

Permanent housing (incl. recon-
struction)

# HHs supported with reconstruction / 
permanent housing 

 -

 -

134

-

-

-

-





CLUSTER OBJECTIVES, ACTIVITIES, INDICATORS AND TARGETS FOR 2019

Relates to CO3 

Relates to CO3 



TARGET

ACTIVITY

LOCATION

INDICATOR

IN NEED

BASELINE

TOTAL

NGCA

GCA: 0-5 KM 
AREA ALONG 
THE CL

GCA: 5-20KM 
AREA ALONG 
THE CL

REST OF GCA

Essential utility network repairs and 
connection

# individuals within communities 
benefiting from utility network 
repairs and connection

 -

 -

270

-

-

-

-

NFI (furniture & equipment set)

# of vulnerable households supported 
with general NFIs to support their 
structural and reconstruction repairs

(furniture & equipment set)

-

-

-

-

-

-

-





 Shelter/NFI Objective 4: National Structures acquire sufficient capacity to coordinate and meet residual humanitarian needs in line with 
humanitarian principles
TARGET

ACTIVITY

LOCATION

INDICATOR

IN NEED

BASELINE

TOTAL

NGCA

GCA: 0-5 KM 
AREA ALONG 
THE CL

GCA: 5-20KM 
AREA ALONG 
THE CL

REST OF GCA

Shelter/NFI Objective 4:

-

-

-

-

-

--

National and sub-national Cluster 
meetings are held regularly

Kyiv for national level, 

sub-national hubs

# Cluster meetings conducted at each 
coordination hub

-

-

20

-

-

-

-

Cluster is deactivated in a timely 
manner according to transition plan

Nationwide & for sub-national 
coordination

# of databases handed over to MTOT 
and IDPs and to local working groups

-

-

-

-

-

-

-





WASH OBJECTIVES, ACTIVITIES, INDICATORS AND TARGETS 

 WASH Objective 1: Ensure immediate and sustainable access to sufficient safe water, and minimal levels of sanitation provision, for 
conflict-affected people.
TARGET

ACTIVITY

LOCATION

INDICATOR

IN NEED

BASELINE

TOTAL

NGCA

GCA: 0-5 KM 
AREA ALONG 
THE CL

GCA: 5-20KM 
AREA ALONG 
THE CL

REST OF GCA

WASH Objective 1:

-

-

1,970,000

-

-

-

-





Relates to CO3 

Relates to CO2 

CO3 



TARGET

ACTIVITY

LOCATION

INDICATOR

IN NEED

BASELINE

TOTAL

NGCA

GCA: 0-5 KM 
AREA ALONG 
THE CL

GCA: 5-20KM 
AREA ALONG 
THE CL

REST OF GCA

Repair/maintenance/replacement of 
pipes, tanks, pumps, etc of existing 
centralized piped water supply 
systems 

Luhanska and Donetska oblasts 
(GCA and NGCA) and areas along 
the ‘contact line’

Indicator 1.1. Number of people 
provided with access to sufficient 
quantity of water (disaggregated by 
sex and age where possible)

-

-

1,000,000

-

-

-

-

Repair/maintenance/replacement of 
pipes, tanks, pumps etc of existing 
decentralized piped water supply 
systems

Luhanska and Donetska oblasts

(GCA and NGCA) and areas

along the ‘contact line’

Indicator 1.1. Number of people 
provided with access to sufficient 
quantity of water (disaggregated by 
sex and age where possible)

-

-

200,000

-

-

-

-

Repair/maintenance/replacement of 
materials or equipment of private or 
small-scale water systems 

Luhanska and Donetska oblasts 
(GCA and NGCA) and areas along 
the ‘contact line’

Indicator 1.1. Number of people 
provided with access to sufficient 
quantity of water (disaggregated by 
sex and age where possible)

-

-

50,000

-

-

-

-

Newly developed water source

Luhanska and Donetska oblasts

(GCA and NGCA) and areas

along the ‘contact line’

Indicator 1.1. Number of people 
provided with access to sufficient 
quantity of water (disaggregated by 
sex and age where possible)

-

-

40,000

-

-

-

-

Improvements to the reliable 
provision of sufficient water, of 
an adequate quality, at social 
institutions

Luhanska and Donetska oblasts

(GCA and NGCA) and areas

along the ‘contact line’

Indicator 1.1. Number of people 
provided with access to sufficient 
quantity of water (disaggregated by 
sex and age where possible)

-

-

120,000

-

-

-

-

Water trucking

Luhanska and Donetska oblasts

(GCA and NGCA) and areas

along the ‘contact line’

Indicator 1.2. Number of people 
provided with access to sufficient 
quality of water (disaggregated by 
sex and age where possible)

-

-

20,000

-

-

-

-

Distribution of bottled water

Luhanska and Donetska oblasts

(GCA and NGCA) and areas

along the ‘contact line’

Indicator 1.2. Number of people 
provided with access to sufficient 
quality of water (disaggregated by 
sex and age where possible)

-

-

6,000

-

-

-

-

Distribution of additional private 
water storage capacity at HH level

Luhanska and Donetska oblasts 
(GCA and NGCA) and areas along 
the ‘contact line’

Indicator 1.2. Number of people 
provided with access to sufficient 
quality of water (disaggregated by 
sex and age where possible)

-

-

2,000

-

-

-

-





CLUSTER OBJECTIVES, ACTIVITIES, INDICATORS AND TARGETS FOR 2019

Relates to CO3 



TARGET

ACTIVITY

LOCATION

INDICATOR

IN NEED

BASELINE

TOTAL

NGCA

GCA: 0-5 KM 
AREA ALONG 
THE CL

GCA: 5-20KM 
AREA ALONG 
THE CL

REST OF GCA

Operation and maintenance of water 
distribution points at checkpoints

Entry-Exit Check Point

Indicator 1.2. Number of people 
provided with access to sufficient 
quality of water (disaggregated by 
sex and age where possible)

-

-

800,000

-

-

-

-

Provision of chemicals at Water 
Treatment Plants

Luhanska and Donetska oblasts 
(GCA and NGCA) and areas along 
the ‘contact line’





Indicator 1.2. Number of people 
provided with access to sufficient 
quality of water (disaggregated by 
sex and age where possible)

-

-

980,000

-

-

-

-

Provision of household level or 
small-scale water treatment supplies 
or equipment

Luhanska and Donetska oblasts 
(GCA and NGCA) and areas along 
the ‘contact line’

Indicator 1.2. Number of people 
provided with access to sufficient 
quality of water (disaggregated by 
sex and age where possible)

-

-

4,000

-

-

-

-

Provision of necessary items to 
labs (lab supplies, materials & 
equipment)

Luhanska and Donetska oblasts

(GCA and NGCA) and areas

along the ‘contact line’

Indicator 1.2. Number of people 
provided with access to sufficient 
quality of water (disaggregated by 
sex and age where possible)

-





-

0

-

-

-

-

Water quality testing

Luhanska and Donetska oblasts

(GCA and NGCA) and areas

along the ‘contact line’

Indicator 1.2. Number of people 
provided with access to sufficient 
quality of water (disaggregated by 
sex and age where possible)

-

-

272

-

-

-

-

Repairs/improvements in off-site 
sewage infrastructure such as 
pumps, treatment equipment or 
sewer pipes

Luhanska and Donetska oblasts

(GCA and NGCA) and areas

along the ‘contact line’

Indicator 1.3. Number of people 
provided with improved access to 
adequate sanitation (disaggregated 
by sex and age where possible)

-

-

330,000

-

-

-

-

Improvements of sanitation at 
household level including septic 
tanks emptying or latrines provision

Luhanska and Donetska oblasts

(GCA and NGCA) and areas

along the ‘contact line’

Indicator 1.3. Number of people 
provided with improved access to 
adequate sanitation (disaggregated 
by sex and age where possible)

-

-

20,000

-

-

-

-

Operation and maintenance of 
sanitation facilities at checkpoints

Entry-Exit Check Point

Indicator 1.3. Number of people 
provided with improved access to 
adequate sanitation (disaggregated 
by sex and age where possible)

-

-

800,000

-

-

-

-

Solid waste collection or processing

Luhanska and Donetska oblasts

(GCA and NGCA) and areas

along the ‘contact line’

Indicator 1.3. Number of people 
provided with improved access to 
adequate sanitation (disaggregated 
by sex and age where possible)

-

-

250,000

-

-

-

-









TARGET

ACTIVITY

LOCATION

INDICATOR

IN NEED

BASELINE

TOTAL

NGCA

GCA: 0-5 KM 
AREA ALONG 
THE CL

GCA: 5-20KM 
AREA ALONG 
THE CL

REST OF GCA

Provision of treatment chemicals to 
sewage plants 

Luhanska and Donetska oblasts

(GCA and NGCA) and areas

along the ‘contact line’

Indicator 1.3. Number of people 
provided with improved access to 
adequate sanitation (disaggregated 
by sex and age where possible)





-

-

-

-

-

-

-

Improvements of sanitary facilities 
at social institutions

Luhanska and Donetska oblasts

(GCA and NGCA) and areas

along the ‘contact line’

Indicator 1.3. Number of people 
provided with improved access to 
adequate sanitation (disaggregated 
by sex and age where possible)

-

-

100,000

-

-

-

-

Operation and maintenance 
of handwashing facilities at 
checkpoints

Entry-Exit Check Point

Indicator 1.3. Number of people 
provided with improved access to 
adequate sanitation (disaggregated 
by sex and age where possible)





-

-

800,000

-

-

-

-

Repairs of hot water infrastructure 
(at building or community level)

Luhanska and Donetska oblasts

(GCA and NGCA) and areas

along the ‘contact line’

Indicator 1.3. Number of people 
provided with improved access to 
adequate sanitation (disaggregated 
by sex and age where possible)

-

-

20,000

-

-

-

-





 WASH Objective 2: Provision of critical WASH-related supplies and information for the prevention of water- and sanitation-related 
diseases
TARGET

ACTIVITY

LOCATION

INDICATOR

IN NEED

BASELINE

TOTAL

NGCA

GCA: 0-5 KM 
AREA ALONG 
THE CL

GCA: 5-20KM 
AREA ALONG 
THE CL

REST OF GCA

WASH Objective 2:

-

-

180,000

-

-

-

-

Provision of hygiene items 

Luhanska and Donetska oblasts 
(GCA and NGCA) and areas along 
the ‘contact line’

Indicator 2.1. Number of people 
provided with critical WASH-
related supplies and/or awareness 
(disaggregated by sex and age where 
possible).

-

-

40,000

-

-

-

-





CLUSTER OBJECTIVES, ACTIVITIES, INDICATORS AND TARGETS FOR 2019

Relates to CO2 



TARGET

ACTIVITY

LOCATION

INDICATOR

IN NEED

BASELINE

TOTAL

NGCA

GCA: 0-5 KM 
AREA ALONG 
THE CL

GCA: 5-20KM 
AREA ALONG 
THE CL

REST OF GCA

Distribution of hygiene promotion 
messages

Luhanska and Donetska oblasts 
(GCA and NGCA) and areas along 
the ‘contact line’

Indicator 2.1. Number of people 
provided with critical WASH-
related supplies and/or awareness 
(disaggregated by sex and age where 
possible).

-

-

150,000

-

-

-

-

Cash or vouchers for hygiene 
materials

Luhanska and Donetska oblasts 
(GCA and NGCA) and areas along 
the ‘contact line’

Indicator 2.1. Number of people 
provided with critical WASH-
related supplies and/or awareness 
(disaggregated by sex and age where 
possible).

-

-

35,000

-

-

-

-

Cash payments or subsidies for 
other WASH activities (e.g. cash for 
work, assistance with water tariff 
payments)

Luhanska and Donetska oblasts 
(GCA and NGCA) and areas along 
the ‘contact line’

Indicator 2.1. Number of people 
provided with critical WASH-
related supplies and/or awareness 
(disaggregated by sex and age where 
possible).

-

-

1,250

-

-

-

-





COMMON SERVICES AND SUPPORT OBJECTIVES, ACTIVITIES, INDICATORS AND TARGETS

 Common Services and Support Objective 1: Adapt coordination mechanisms to the context and 

support effective, coherent and principled delivery of humanitarian assistance
ACTIVITY

LOCATION

INDICATOR

IN NEED

BASELINE

TARGET

Monitoring and analysis of events impacting the 
humanitarian response, including reporting, advocacy 
documents, needs/gaps analysis.

Kyiv, Kramatorsk/Slovyansk, Sievierodonetsk, Mariupol, 
Donetsk and Luhansk

HCT, inter-cluster, general and field-based, civil-military, NGO and donor 
coordination provided with regular advocacy and analysis documents. 

-

n/a

Monthly

HCT carries out regular review of coordination mechanisms, 
in collaboration with ICG, clusters, and possibly with HQ 
support 

Kyiv, Kramatorsk/Slovyansk, Sievierodonetsk, Mariupol, 
Donetsk and Luhansk

Regular follow up of transition plans for clusters

n/a

Yearly





 Common Services and Support Objective 2: Guide humanitarian action by joint strategic planning, improved information

 management and needs assessment, and respond based on prioritized needs, including preparedness and resilience aspects
ACTIVITY

LOCATION

INDICATOR

IN NEED

BASELINE

TARGET

Prepare and share in a timely fashion quality information 
products (e.g. 3W, humanitarian bulletins, snapshots, 
dashboards, access, incident maps etc.) based on 
information available 

Kyiv, Kramatorsk/Slovyansk, Sievierodonetsk, Mariupol, 
Donetsk and Luhansk

Situational and analytical reports regularly submitted and circulated to 
humanitarian partners

-

Monthly

Monthly/
quarterly





Relates to CO1 

CO2 CO3 

Relates to CO1 

CO2 CO3 



ACTIVITY

LOCATION

INDICATOR

IN NEED

BASELINE

TARGET

Facilitate joint and coordinated assessments and reporting 
on results 

Kyiv, Kramatorsk/Slovyansk, Sievierodonetsk, Mariupol, 
Donetsk and Luhansk

Joint assessments, and monitoring and evaluation missions, occur on a 
regular basis

n/a

n/a

n/a

Process and analyse results of multi-sector, cluster-specific 
and other needs assessments for strategic plans, advocacy 
and other coordination products and lead process for the 
development of the HNO and Humanitarian Reponse Plan

Kyiv, Kramatorsk/Slovyansk, Sievierodonetsk, Mariupol, 
Donetsk and Luhansk

HNO, HRP and revisions, contingency plan revision based on analysis of 
information and assessments available 

n/a

n/a

At 
least 
once 
a year

Organize Inter-Agency Contingency Plan (IACP) meeting and 
develop IACP updates with all relevant stakeholders for HCT 
endorsement

Kyiv, Kramatorsk/Slovyansk, Sievierodonetsk, Mariupol, 
Donetsk and Luhansk

Preparedness and resilience aspects of emergency response are regularly 
reviewed and planning processes are in place

n/a

Yearly

Once 
a 
year 
or 
as 
recommended 


by the ICCG 
and HCT





 Common Services and Support Objective 3: Ensure predictable, timely and sustained humanitarian 

financing based on priority needs
ACTIVITY

LOCATION

INDICATOR

IN NEED

BASELINE

TARGET

Adequate resources are mobilized for humanitarian 
action 

Countrywide

Provide HCT and other stakeholders with regular monitoring on HRP funding 

-

n/a

Monthly

Facilitate, guide and consolidate Central Emergency 
Response Fund (CERF) submission and reporting under 
the auspices of the Humani-tarian Coordinator

Countrywide

CERF requests elaborated and submitted

n/a

n/a

n/a

Organize or facilitate regularengagement and field 
missions with key donors for advocacy and resource 
mobilization purposes

Kyiv, Kramatorsk/Slovyansk, Sievierodonetsk, 
Mariupol, Donetsk and Luhansk

Regular donor coordination meetings and field missions facilitated

-

n/a

Monthly 
and 
as 
needed





CLUSTER OBJECTIVES, ACTIVITIES, INDICATORS AND TARGETS FOR 2019

Relates to CO1 

CO2 CO3 



MULTI-PURPOSE CASH (MPC) OBJECTIVES, ACTIVITIES, INDICATORS AND TARGETS

 MPC Objective 1: Increase the purchasing power of the targeted population to cover their immediate basic needs
TARGET

ACTIVITY

LOCATION

INDICATOR

IN NEED

BASELINE

TOTAL

NGCA

GCA: 0-5 KM 
AREA ALONG 
THE CL

GCA: 5-20KM 
AREA ALONG 
THE CL

REST OF GCA

MPC Objective 1:

-

26,100

-

-

-

-

-

Provision of timely MPC transfers

# of individuals assisted

26,100

30,710

1,500

20,560

8,650

-

# of grants distributed, by amount 
and month

26,100

n/a

-

-

-

-

# of grants redeemed, by amount 
and month

26,100

n/a

-

-

-

-





 

MPC Objective 2: Reduce usage of negative coping mechanisms by vulnerable people
TARGET

ACTIVITY

LOCATION

INDICATOR

IN NEED

BASELINE

TOTAL

NGCA

GCA: 0-5 KM 
AREA ALONG 
THE CL

GCA: 5-20KM 
AREA ALONG 
THE CL

REST OF GCA

MPC Objective 2:

-

-

21,500

-

-

-

-

Baseline and endline analysis 
conducted and changes tracked to 
identify reduction of CSI scores

# of individuals with CSI score that 
does not increase over the course of 
the program (approximately 70 per 
cent of the target)

n/a

n/a

21,500

-

-

-

-





Relates to CO1 

CO2 

Relates to CO1 

CO2 CO3 



PARTICIPATING ORGANIZATIONS & FUNDING REQUIREMENTS

ORGANIZATIONS

REQUIREMENTS US$

Adventist Development and Relief Agency

 622,717 

Agency for Technical Cooperation and Development

 1,525,350 

All-Ukrainian Charitable Foundation "Right to Protection"

 1,734,800 

All-Ukrainian Network of People Living with HIV/AIDS

 3,927,821 

Arbeiter-Samariter-Bund Deutschland e.V

 3,423,597 

Arche Nova E.V. - Initiative for People in Need

 4,545,297 

Caritas Austria

 276,300 

Caritas Germany (DCV)

 2,212,226 

Caritas Ukraine

 4,861,124 

Charitable Organization Charitable Foundation "Donbass Development 
Center"

 2,546,400 

Charity Organization "Station "Kharkiv" Charity Foundation

 249,450 

Danish De-mining Group

 1,552,500 

Danish Refugee Council

 2,087,135 

Dorcas Aid International

 1,147,577 

Emmanuel Charity Association, International Public Organization

 2,090,944 

HALO Trust

 8,323,689 

HelpAge International

 1,350,000 

International NGO Safety Organisation

 378,694 

International Organization for Migration

 21,000,000 

Médecins du Monde

 3,300,480 

Mine Safe Ukraine

 150,000 

NGO Development Foundation

 752,430 

NGO Open Policy Foundation

 202,420 

NGO Proliska

 1,300,000 

Norwegian Refugee Council

 5,456,642 

Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs

 3,657,006 

Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights

 1,382,400 

People in Need

 10,676,176 

Polish Humanitarian Action

 548,000 

Première Urgence Internationale

 2,656,543 

Responsible Citizens

 991,270 

Save the Children

 8,994,800 

SOS Children's Villages

 204,554 

Terre des Hommes - Lausanne

 512,102 

Triangle Génération Humanitaire

 4,895,000 

Ukraine NGO Forum

 430,305 

United Nations Children's Fund

 21,210,853 

United Nations Development Programme

 1,198,800 







ORGANIZATIONS

REQUIREMENTS US$

United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

 20,385,647 

United Nations Population Fund

 2,202,726 

World Health Organization

 6,550,540 

Young Men’s Christian Association

 81,240 

Zaporizhzhia Region Charity Fund "Child Smile"

 138,100 







WHAT IF

...WE FAIL TO RESPOND?

1.3 MILLION PEOPLE LEFT WITHOUT 
LIFE-SAVING PROTECTION ASSISTANCE

• Increase in civilian casualties due to absence of 
humanitarian mine action, including surveying, 
marking, mine risk education and demining.
• Children living along the ‘contact line’ will not 
be assisted and be at higher risk of psychosocial 
distress, risk behaviour, family separation and 
institutionalisation due to lack of appropriate 
protection assistance, including safe spaces and 
psychosocial support.
• People at risk of GBV and GBV survivors lack 
appropriate assistance.
• Increase in IDPs and conflict-affected population 
resorting to negative coping mechanisms due to 
inability to meet basic needs.
• Increase in involuntary return to NGCA and 
areas near the ‘contact line’ in GCA, due to lack of 
humanitarian assistance in areas of displacement.


VULNERABLE POPULATIONS DEPRIVED 
OF VITAL SUPPORT IN HARSH SOCIO-
ECONOMIC CONDITIONS 

• Food insecurity continues to affect the lives of 
900,000 people who struggle to meet their daily 
nutritional needs and require life-saving assistance 
due to the ongoing conflict.
• If humanitarian interventions discontinue, more 
people will require assistance in the future as the 
most vulnerable men, women and children are still 
not able to access essential services and cover their 
basic needs.
• As the situation is increasingly protracted, the sector 
requires adequate funds to support the vulnerable 
people in sustaining their livelihoods, while bridging 
the gap between humanitarian and development 
assistance to help them recover from their economic 
hardship and dependence on assistance.


MORE THAN ONE THIRD OF THE 
HOUSEHOLDS IN THE CONFLICT ZONE 
LACK ACCESS TO HEALTH CARE

• As much as 50 per cent of households 
in conflict areas report lack of access to 
mental health services. As the situation 
protracts, conflict-induced stress and 
emotional distress will inevitably become 
long-term mental health issues.
• The health-care system in Ukraine remains unable 
to meet the demand for services as 38 per cent 
of households in the conflict zone report lack of 
access to health-care services.
• The quantity and quality of service delivery 
remains a challenge as up to 72 per cent of the 
people in conflict areas say they are “completely 
unable” to cover medical expenses.


WATER STOPPAGES AND HEATING CUTS 
WILL INCREASE THE RISKS TO PUBLIC 
HEALTH AND ADDITIONAL MIGRATION

• Large scale water and sewerage systems may fail 
due to lack of repair or direct shelling.
• Increased public health risks due to lack of clean 
water, sewage and garbage released into the 
environment.
• Winter heating systems may fail at critical times 
of the year causing extreme hardship to older and 
disabled people.
• Additional mass migration is possible both within 
Ukraine and outside its borders. 




URGENTLY NEEDED SHELTER AND 
WINTERISATION SUPPORT FOR 
THOUSANDS OF FAMILIES IN PERIL

• Residual humanitarian shelter needs will not be 
covered in NGCA.
• Shelter needs of many families in NGCA will not be 
addressed, forcing many of them leave their homes.
• Failing to provide life-saving winterisation assistance 
may have serious consequences on the health of the 
most vulnerable on both sides of the ‘contact line’.


RISK OF A LOST GENERATION

• Thousands of conflict-affected 
children on both sides of the ‘contact 
line’ will not have access to a safe and protective 
learning environment with quality education and 
adequate learning material.
• If not delivered in a conflict-sensitive way, education 
programmes can lead to a rise in violence.
• Children from most vulnerable groups will 
experience increased gaps in education leading to 
a higher number of mine-risk related incidents, 
harmful sexual behaviour and child recruitment.
• The cumulative impact of years of conflict will 
compound and impact the learning and wellbeing 
for hundreds of thousands of students and teachers.




This document is produced on behalf of the Humanitarian Country Team and partners in Ukraine.

This document provides the Humanitarian Country Team’s shared understanding of the crisis, including the most pressing 
humanitarian needs, and reflects its joint humanitarian response planning.

The designation employed and the presentation of material on this report do not imply the expression of any opinion 
whatsoever on the part of the Humanitarian Country Team and partners concerning the legal status of any country, territory, 
city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.

www.unocha.org/ukraine

www.reliefweb.int

www.humanitarianresponse.info/en/operations/ukraine

https://reports.unocha.org/country/ukraine/ 



