2019 UPDATE, DECEMBER 2018
AFGHANISTAN
Photo: Jim Huylebroek
RESPONSE PLAN
HUMANITARIAN
JANUARY 2018 - DECEMBER 2021
02
PART I: ﻿ ﻿
A F G H A N I S TA N
BADAKHsHAN
BADgHIs
BAgHlAN
BAlKH
BAMYAN
DAYKUNDI
FARAH
FARYAB
gHAZNI
gHoR
HIlMAND
HIRAT
JAwZJAN
KANDAHAR
KAPIsA
PARwAN
KHosT
KUNDUZ
lAgHMAN
KUNAR
logAR NANgARHAR
NIMRoZ
NURIsTAN
PAKTIKA
PAKTYA
PANJsHER
sAMANgAN
sAR-E-PUl
TAKHAR
URUZgAN
wARDAK
ZABUl
INDIA
IRAN
KAZAKHsTAN
KYRgYZsTAN
PAKIsTAN
TAJIKIsTAN
TURKMENIsTAN
UZBEKIsTAN
CHINA
JAMMU
AND
KAsHMIR
Kabul
NoRTH
wAZIRIsTAN
AgENCY
Internally displaced
people (IDPs)
Returnees
Pakistani refugees
Pakistani refugee
movement
Returnee movement
Source: IOM, OCHA ,UNHCR
CoNFlICT sEVERITY
- +
Border crossing
Torkham
Spin
Boldak
Milak - Zaranj
Islam Qala
TOTAL POPULATION
35.7M
PEOPLE IN NEED
2019
6.3M
PEOPLE TO BE
ASSISTED 2019
4.5M
REQUIREMENTS
2019 (US$)
612M
# HUMANITARIAN
PARTNERS
166
Conflict severity is derived from three indicators - armed clashes and air strikes, conflict-
induced displacement and civilian casualties recorded over the past year.
03 #
PART I: ﻿
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Foreword by the Humanitarian Coordinator ........................... 04
PART I: COUNTRY STRATEGY
The humanitarian response plan at a glance .......................... 05
Overview of the crisis ................................................................. 06
Strategic objectives ..................................................................... 11
Response strategy ....................................................................... 12
Cross-cutting issues ..................................................................... 18
Humanitarian access ................................................................... 22
Operational capacity ................................................................... 24
Response monitoring .................................................................. 26
Consequences of underfunding ................................................ 28
Summary of needs, targets & requirements ............................ 30
PART II: OPERATIONAL RESPONSE PLANS
Education in emergencies .......................................................... 32
Emergency shelter & non-food items ....................................... 35
Food security & agriculture ........................................................ 38
Health ............................................................................................ 41
Nutrition ........................................................................................ 44
Protection ..................................................................................... 47
Water, sanitation & hygiene ....................................................... 50
Multi-purpose cash assistance ................................................... 53
Refugee chapter .......................................................................... 55
PART III: ANNEXES
Logframe ....................................................................................... 59
Planning figures (2019-2021) ................................................... 71
Participating organisations by sector ....................................... 74
Acronyms ...................................................................................... 75
References .................................................................................... 77
What if? ...we fail to respond ..................................................... 79
Guide to giving ............................................................................ 80
04
PART I: Foreword by the humanitarian coordinat or
FOREWORD BY
THE HUMANITARIAN
COORDINATOR
Since arriving in Afghanistan in March 2017, I have seen
Afghanistan face its worst drought in decades; insecurity grow
in both intensity and geographic scope; and the proportion
of the population living in poverty reach 54 per cent. At the
same time, I have seen people, many of whom have known
nothing but a lifetime of war, experience their first taste of
peace following an unprecedented Eid ceasefire; economic
growth pick-up; and the international community in Geneva
reaffirm its commitment to Afghanistan’s stability, selfreliance,
and regional connectivity. Working towards a better
tomorrow, however, must not distract us from healing the
wounds of today.
As many as 6.3 million people need humanitarian aid in 2019,
including 4 million because of drought. Of these, 3.6 million
people are experiencing emergency levels of food insecurity
– a 24 per cent increase on the same period of 2017. At
the same time, Afghanistan is grappling with a conflict too
often marked by suicide bombs, targeted attacks on civilian
infrastructure and air strikes. As my colleagues and I have
moved around the country it is hard not to be confronted by
the visible signs of war: children without limbs or mothers
blinded by shrapnel. Already one of the hardest countries
for people to make ends meet, the prospects of doing so in
Afghanistan when disabled are dim.
Given the complexity of the crisis and severity of need
now present, the Humanitarian Country Team (HCT)
has updated the multi-year Humanitarian Response Plan
(HRP) to prioritise the delivery of life-saving assistance to
the most affected people and to include two ‘humanitarianplus’
activities: to help restore livelihoods; and rehabilitate
and reintegrate trauma victims into society. Humanitarian
agencies and development actors plan on expanding
partnerships and using innovative technologies, such
as predictive analysis and risk management that help to
better forecast and respond to disaster, thereby maximising
collective impact on the ground. I am delighted that the
Famine Action Mechanism (FAM), a multi-stakeholder
platform involving the Government, the World Bank, civil
society, and other key partners, to bridge short and longterm
food and water security needs will be activated in
Afghanistan in 2019.
Meeting immediate needs while reducing risk and
vulnerability, however, requires multi-year funding as well
as increased support for preparedness and new ways of
working. This is why the updated HRP presents, for the first
time, multi-year figures for people in need (PiN), people
to be assisted and financial requirements; indeed, only by
shoring-up more predictable funding can we end the cycle
of repetitive and costly humanitarian action. With donors
having significantly stepped up their financial contributions
in 2018 to enable the response to the drought, I call on them
to act again between now and 2021 as we require US$1.5
billion to meet the most pressing humanitarian needs in
Afghanistan. Almost half of this amount – $612 million – is
for 2019 when we aim to assist 4.5 million people.
As we embark on this programme, in close coordination with
key government institutions, we face a dichotomy. On the
one hand, new-found opportunities for peace offer hope to
a people who have endured nothing but conflict; the chance
for development to expand where it has previously been
unable to; and for improved rains to yield a better harvest and
alleviate the impact of the drought. On the other hand, we are
mindful that prospects for negotiating peace can be marked
by escalating hostilities as parties position themselves for
talks; increased political competition as the country prepares
for district council, provincial and presidential elections; and
the heightened risk of flooding due to El Niño-related rains. I
nevertheless believe that with the ongoing support of donors
and continued commitment and investment of partners
we can overcome the challenges ahead of us and ensure,
in tandem with key institutions of the state, that timely aid
reaches people who need it most.
Toby Lanzer
Humanitarian Coordinator
05 #
PART I: 2018-2021 Humanitarian Response Plan 2019 at a glance
7
14
21 35
12
15
3
7
18
16 11 18
9
2647 26
6
3
5
12 685
12
11
12 5
26 22
20
15
29 25
22
Kabul
GHAZNI
SAR-E-PUL
HIRAT
URUZGAN
SAMANGAN
LGH.
ZABUL
NURISTAN
HILMAND
BALKH
PAKTYA
FARYAB
KANDAHAR
BADGHIS
BAMYAN
BADAKHSHAN
GHOR
BAGHLAN
PRW.
NANGARHAR
KUNAR
TAKHAR
LOGAR
DAYKUNDI
KHOST
JAWZJAN
WARDAK
FARAH
NIMROZ
KUNDUZ
PNJS.
PAKTIKA
2018-2021 HUMANITARIAN RESPONSE PLAN
2019 AT A GLANCE
PEOPLE IN NEED
6.3M
TOTAL REQUIREMENTS (US$)
$612M
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 1
Lives are saved in the areas of highest need
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 3
People affected by sudden- and slow-onset crises
are provided with a timely response
*Figures refered to on this page reflect year two (2019) of the HRP only. Please refer to the needs, targets and requirements section on pages 72-73 for 2020 and
2021 figures.
**IDPs, returnees and refugees
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 2
Protection violations are reduced and respect
for International Humanitarian Law (IHL) is
increased
OPERATIONAL PRESENCE: AN OVERVIEW OF NUMBER OF PARTNERS
166
PEOPLE TO RECEIVE HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE
4.5M CONFLICT AFFECTED
0.5M
PEOPLE ON THE MOVE**
0.9M
NATURAL DISASTER AFFECTED
3M
NO ACCESS TO BASIC SERVICES
1.3M
BREAKDOWN OF GROUPS TO RECEIVE HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE
PEOPLE TO RECEIVE ASSISTANCE
4.5M
*
06
PART I: OVERVIEW of the crisis
55 59 47 53 52 48 40 58 48
158
49
64 53 56 45
132 128
198
42
154
New internal displacement Returnees from Iran and Pakistan Sudden-onset natural disaster affected
37 33 32 48 31 51 43 37
85 51 26 36 24 33 61 79 55 50
154
30
47 35
104 73
24
53 52 50
71
62
54 51 56 60
83 85
55 72
84
80 75
56
50
100
150
200
250 (thousands)
CRISIS TIMELINE
OVERVIEW OF
THE CRISIS
Ongoing conflict, the worst drought in decades, and deepening poverty have
all contributed to a deteriorating humanitarian situation across Afghanistan. As
many as 6.3 million people require some form of humanitarian and protection
assistance in 2019 – almost double the number at this time last year. The next
three years are likely to be equally challenging with needs determined by the
political, economic and regional context, which could evolve in both positive
and negative ways, and imply an increase or decrease in needs accordingly.
People are facing multiple crises, including armed conflict, displacement, drought, chronic underdevelopment and weak
investment in basic services, all of which demand a humanitarian response. More than 17 million people live in the provinces
most severely affected by drought, of which 10.5 million have been affected and 4 million require an inter-sectoral response to
survive. At the same time, a quarter of all districts (106 out of 401) have a conflict-severity score of 4 (out of 5) due to the highlevels
of displacement, armed clashes, air strikes and civilian casualties experienced by communities living in these locations.1
This chapter briefly summarises the overall drivers and impact of the crisis. Additional thematic and sector-specific needs
analyses can be found in the Afghanistan Humanitarian Needs Overview (HNO).
June 2018
Some 355,000
civilians return
from Iran in the first
six months of the year;
the highest number to
do so since IOM started
recording in 2007.
August 2017
The United
Nations (UN)
states that Afghanistan
is no longer in a postconflict
situation, but a
country at war.
May 2017
A truck bomb
next to Kabul’s
diplomatic quarter kills
150 people and injures
more than 400 in the
deadliest ever terror
attack to strike the city.
January 2018
A Save the
Children
compound is attacked in
Jalalabad City, Nangarhar
province, resulting in the
deaths of four aid workers
and injuring over 20;
Daesh/Islamic State of
Khorasan (ISK) claims
responsibility.
April 2018
The government
declares
Afghanistan as droughtaffected.
More than a
quarter of a million
people move in the
western region in the
following months in
search of food, water and
livelihoods.
07 #
PART I: OVERVIEW of the crisis
158
198
50
100
150
200
250
Armed conflict and a deteriorating protection
environment
Ongoing conflict continues to drive humanitarian needs
across Afghanistan, inflicting high levels of civilian
casualties and collateral damage on health and education
facilities, as well as disrupting and destroying other lifesustaining
civilian infrastructure such as water, electricity
and telecommunication systems. Violations of IHL and
international human rights law (IHRL) occur frequently.
The first nine months of 2018 alone registered a 46 per cent
increase in the number of civilian casualties from suicide
attacks;2 a 39 per cent increase in civilian casualties resulting
from airstrikes,3 and a 153 per cent increase in aid workers
killed and injured compared to the same period last year.4
Overall, 8,050 civilian casualties (2,798 deaths and 5,252
injuries) were recorded nationwide between January and
September 2018.⁵ Health partners reported 85,477 traumarelated
consultations between January and September – a 24
per cent increase on the same period in 2017.⁶ Traumatic
amputations, many of which are now bilateral and trilateral,
constitute a significant and growing burden on civilians.
The invisible toll of the conflict has been no less severe: 70
per cent of men do not feel safe when travelling to work, the
mosque, health and education facilities or the market, with
this figure as high as 95 per cent in Uruzgan and 92 per cent
in Hilmand.⁷ Deprived of one of the two most fundamental
human requirements - the need for safety and security – for
almost four decades now, it is no surprise that people’s ratings
of their own quality of life in Afghanistan are lower than any
other population worldwide. When recently asked to rate
their life-quality on a ladder scale where ‘0’ represents their
worst possible life and ‘10’ their best possible life, people gave
an average rating of 2.7 in 2018, down from 4.2 in 2016. This
is the joint-lowest figure Gallup has recorded in any country
since it began tracking these measures in 2006.⁸
INTERNALLY DISPLACED PEOPLE
RETURNEES FROM PAKISTAN
RETURNEES FROM IRAN
NATURAL DISASTER-AFFECTED (SLOW- & SUDDEN-ONSET)
JAN-OCT 2018
551K*
PROJECTED for 2019
800K
JAN-OCT 2018
43K
PROJECTED for 2019
105K
JAN-OCT 2018
670K
PROJECTED for 2019
575K***
OCT 2018
3.54M**
PROJECTED for 2019
4M
An increase in conflict-driven
humanitarian needs is expected.
August 2018
A three-day
Taliban assault
on Ghazni City
leaves 210 civilians
dead or injured and
displaces more than
37,000 people to
surrounding areas
and Kabul city.
November 2018
The Integrated
Phase
Classification Unit of the
Ministry of Agriculture,
Irrigation & Livestock
(MAIL) estimates 13.5
million to be living in
Crisis and Emergency
levels of food insecurity
– an increase of 6 million
on the same period in
2017.
October 2018
Following a
three-year
delay, parliamentary
elections are held
amidst tight security.
While four million
people vote, elections
are marred by
violence which sees
more than 400 civilian
casualties on the days
ballots are cast.
* 287,000 displaced due to conflict, 263,000 displaced due to drought
** 77,000 due to sudden-onset disasters, 3.46m due to drought (non-displaced)
*** 20 per cent of returnees from Iran (115,000) are considered vlunerable
08
PART I: OVERVIEW of the crisis
A people on the move
In 2018 people have continued to use mobility as a coping
mechanism to manage a range of conflict, protection and
livelihoods risks. While the number of people displaced due
to conflict has once again declined, the effects of the drought
have contributed to significant numbers of people on the
move.⁹ Between June and August alone, 263,000 people were
displaced within Badghis and Hirat provinces, leading to the
emergence of 19 vast and sprawling informal settlements.10
Displaced families living in informal settlements are
particularly vulnerable to the use of negative coping
mechanisms, such as reduced food intake and a reliance on
child labour. IDP families residing in informal settlements
report that they earn, on average, 20 per cent less than other
IDP households,11 frequently do not own Tazkeras (national
ID) and have children who are less likely to attend school.12
Across the country, a lack of civil documentation consistently
hinders access to assistance and services for displaced
households, in particular education.
While returnee flows have accelerated since 2014 and are
now reaching unprecedented levels, 2018 trends have been
dominated by the surge in returns from Iran which, at more
than 670,000, have already well surpassed last year’s total.13
Of particular concern is the higher prevalence of especially
vulnerable individuals among the returnees, including
22,000 unaccompanied minors, single women, as well as
hundreds of critical trauma cases.14 The combination of
higher than expected returns from Iran and drought-induced
displacement has resulted in significant demographic changes
across various parts of the country. In Farah province, one
in four people is now either an IDP or returnee, while Hirat
province hosts the highest number of IDPs and returnees
nationwide – more than 200,000 people.15 In contrast to
returns from Iran, the number of people arriving home
to Afghanistan from Pakistan is at an all-time low. So far
this year, just 43,000 people have returned from Pakistan,
including 13,295 registered refugees, following a continued
decline in related push and pull factors.16
Once in-country, however, and whether documented or
not, returnees become de-facto IDPs as conflict and lost
community networks prevent them from returning to places
of origin, exposing them to episodes of further displacement.
Three quarters of returnees surveyed in late 2017 indicated
that they were unable to go back to their original home
because of insecurity, while 72 per cent reported their
families have been displaced twice and almost 33 per cent
three times.17 The concentration of IDPs and returnees
in just a handful of urban centres has compounded the
pressure on over-stretched services and infrastructure, and
increased competition for resources in host communities.
Providing support to host communities and displaced people
alike is essential to unlocking the potential of both groups
moving forward and ultimately to reducing their need for
humanitarian assistance over time.
Drought compounds humanitarian needs
In 2018 drought has affected more than two-thirds of
Afghanistan, devastating the agricultural sector and leaving
some four million people across the worst-affected provinces
in need of life-saving assistance. The drought has unleashed
a host of problems on already impoverished communities,
reducing incomes by half,18 exposing people to additional
health risks and causing households to engage in negative
coping mechanisms. Currently, 13.5 million people are
facing Crisis or worse levels (Integrated Food Security Phase
Classification or IPC Phase 3+) of food insecurity, 6 million
more than this time last year, of which 3.6 million are facing
Emergency levels (IPC Phase 4) nationwide.19
The drought has also exacerbated the humanitarian needs
of children. Rates of child marriage in Badghis province are
13 per cent higher than the national average,20 while cases
of child labour, child abandonment, and child-selling have
all been reported in recent months as families have resorted
to increasingly risky measures to survive severe financial
hardship.21 Child health indicators in drought-affected areas
and among drought-affected people are similarly worrisome.
A rapid nutrition survey conducted in Badghis province in
July found that global acute malnutrition (GAM) and severe
acute malnutrition (SAM) rates now exceed emergency
thresholds at 19.7 per cent and 5.7 per cent respectively,
while poor access to health services in areas of origin has
contributed to high rates of children under two missing out on
vaccinations in Badghis (51 per cent) and Ghor (26 per cent)
provinces, compared to the national average of 18.3 per cent.22
However despite concerns that a drop in agricultural
production related to the drought would result in higher
commodity prices, markets have remained remarkably stable.
Seventy-eight per cent of traders surveyed in nine of the most
drought-affected provinces in April/May 2018 said that the
supply of wheat flour was the same as or higher than the same
period the previous year, and 82 per cent said prices were the
same or lower.23 Indeed, contrary to prevailing assumptions
that the main factors influencing local prices in Afghanistan
are conflict, increased demand, or drops in local agricultural
09 #
PART I: OVERVIEW of the crisis
production, in fact the biggest determinants of market prices
are macro-economic factors – in particular, fluctuations in the
currenies of the United States, Afghanistan, Pakistan and Iran;
changes in global food prices; or changes in trade agreements/
border closures with Pakistan, Iran or Uzbekistan (the three
neighbouring countries through which Afghanistan imports
most of its staple foods).
A crisis of access to services
A combination of widespread conflict, prohibitive costs,
as well as inadequate coverage and capacity, continue to
disrupt, delay or deny people’s access to the healthcare
they need. Access to the national Basic Package of Health
Services (BPHS) and Essential Package of Hospital Services
(EPHS) remains uneven across the country with surveys
consistently showing imbalances across socio-economic levels,
including a clear urban/rural divide and high out-of-pocket
expenditures, while mental health, control of epidemics and
non-communicable diseases are all inadequately addressed by
the current system.24 As of September, 72 health facilities had
been forcibly closed and four destroyed in 2018, depriving
up to 3.5 million people of access to primary healthcare, with
Nangarhar, Badghis and Zabul among the worst-affected
provinces.25
Despite year-on-year increases in mass casualty incidents,
basic and essential surgical care remains outside the seven
major elements of the BPHS, meaning that trauma provision
is almost exclusively provided by humanitarian partners.
Nationwide there is an extreme shortage of emergency
surgical capacities, ranging from oxygen supplies, blood
banks, and electrical power, through to dedicated and
qualified personnel – including surgeons and anaesthetists.26
Despite significant improvements in assisting people closer to
the place of injury, high rates of referral continue to be seen
from conflict-affected districts, suggesting that demand is
outstripping response capacity in many parts of the country.27
A generation at risk
Children continue to be disproportionately affected by the
crisis, comprising 60 per cent of the total number of people in
need in 2019. Persistent violence, discrimination, and denial
of access to essential services – particularly healthcare and
education – have all undermined their right to a safe and
secure early environment, compromising their physical and
psychological well-being. 2018 has seen an alarming increase
in the number of schools attacked and closed as electionrelated
violence, general insecurity, cross-fire, intimidation
and threats have both disrupted and diminished children’s
access to essential education. More than 1,150 schools were
closed across the country in the first 11 months of 2018,
depriving up to 545,000 students of learning opportunities.28
Girls – who are already less likely to go to school – have been
particularly impacted.
Despite an overall decrease in the number of children killed
and injured in the first 9 months of 2018, casualties remain
extremely high with 2,136 recorded.29 In addition to the
physical costs imposed on children, the mental toll on those
who have experienced stressful situations – now multidimensional
in nature – has been considerable.30 More than
three-quarters of households surveyed as part of the Whole
of Afghanistan (WoA) Assessment indicated that they were
aware of children in their community in need of psychological
support, with conflict, airstrikes, displacement and the loss of
a family member cited as the primary causes.
Similar concerns and stressors afflict under-25s, many of
whom have known nothing other than a lifetime of crisis
and conflict. According to a recent perception survey, 39 per
cent of the population would now leave the country if they
had the opportunity to do so – a 9 per cent increase on those
expressing the same desire the previous year – with insecurity
(76 per cent) and unemployment (54 per cent) given as the
top reasons.31 With an increasingly untenable and inhospitable
environment in Iran and much of Europe,32 many have been
left with little alternative but to stay and take their chances,
despite the disconcerting and uncertain future confronting
them.*
*The number of people from Afghanistan filing for asylum in the European Union in 2017 was 75 per cent less than the previous year.
10
PART I: OVERVIEW of the crisis
Outlook for 2019 and beyond
2019 promises to be another tumultuous year for the people
of Afghanistan, with presidential elections – set for April
– likely to be accompanied by a spike in violence as nonstate
armed groups (NSAGs) seek to disrupt the process by
targeting schools, mosques and other civilian infrastructure
serving as voter registration and polling centres. Although
a series of significant diplomatic developments has recently
renewed hopes for a negotiated political settlement, conflict is
expected to continue in 2019 and may even intensify in some
parts of Afghanistan as both sides try to improve their hand in
advance of any direct peace talks.
Looking ahead to 2020 and 2021, the humanitarian
community remains cautiously optimistic that an improved
security situation may evolve, resulting in slightly less
conflict-related IDPs over time and improved reintegration
prospects for returning populations, however partners will
remain prepared for all eventualities including a potential
deterioration in the situation and an increase in needs. The
physical threat posed by Daesh is also unlikely to be fully
eradicated, and while no meaningful expansion of territorial
control is foreseen, they are expected to retain their capacity
to carry-out spectacular mass casualty incidents in major
urban centres, such as Jalalabad and Kabul, as well as attacks
against Non-Government Organisation (NGO) and UN
targets, both of which may increase in the coming years.
The increased likelihood of average to above-average
precipitation during the 2018/19 wet season33 is expected to
alleviate some of the current effects of the drought, although
improved rains and the predicted El Niño weather effect will
bring their own risk. Dry, compacted soils mean water is less
easily absorbed into the ground and more likely to run-off
in the event of heavy rains, causing flash flooding which, in
turn, could generate additional humanitarian needs. This is
especially the case in flood-prone areas such as the northwestern,
northern and central highland regions. Against
this backdrop, chronic needs arising from years of underinvestment
in basic services, bureaucratic inefficiencies,
escalating poverty and rapid population growth continue to
undermine the future prospects of the population.
11 #
PART I: Strate gic Objective s
STRATEGIC
OBJECTIVES
The humanitarian community will continue to prioritise the delivery of lifesaving
assistance and protection services to address the acute needs identified
in the HNO, while simultaneously preventing the most severely food insecure
from slipping into famine. Given the extent to which livelihoods have been
decimated by the drought, partners will harness the multi-year timeframe of the
HRP to support initial recovery and resilience-building for the worst-affected
communities. This will be supported by enhanced advocacy, collaboration and
sequencing of action with development partners in order to handover eventual
responsibility to longer-term programmes which can more sustainably address
the root causes and drivers of vulnerability.
1 Lives are saved in the areas of highest need
Deteriorating and widening insecurity is exposing greater numbers of people to life-threatening
harm and injury across Afghanistan. For the next three years of the 2018-2021 HRP, the primary
objective will be the provision of immediate and effective assistance which prevents loss of life
and alleviates human suffering. In 2019, particular efforts will be made to scale-up operations which rollback
food insecurity and avert extreme hunger, as well as mitigate the likelihood that risky negative coping
mechanisms will be deployed by a significant proportion of the population.
2 Protection violations are reduced and respect for International
Humanitarian Law is increased
Evolving conflict and continued violations of IHL have contributed to an alarming protection crisis
affecting all members of society. Disproportionately affected are displaced people (both internally
and cross-border; recently or for protracted periods), women, children, ethnic minorities, as well as rural
populations who are disconnected from economic centres and who are yet to benefit from national-level
policies and frameworks. Over the next three years, humanitarian actors will continue to deliver needs-based
assistance which promotes the safety and dignity of the people it serves. 3People affected by sudden- and slow-onset crises are provided with a
timely response
Almost 40 years of relentless war, exposure to natural or environmental hazards, including in 2018
one of the worst droughts in decades, rapid population growth and urbanisation, have all eroded
the livelihoods and purchasing power of millions, forcing families to resort to increasingly harmful coping
strategies to survive. With conflict, climate variability and economic challenges all expected to continue,
investments in science and technology which enhance predictive capacities - including initiatives such as the
FAM – and improve the timeliness of the response will be prioritised. Activities which rebuild livelihoods,
such as asset rehabilitation and cash-for-livelihoods programmes, will also be considered for the most
vulnerable drought-affected communities where market assessments and perception surveys show that they
are feasible and have been identified as a priority.
12
PART I: Response strate gy
RESPONSE
STRATEGY
In late 2017, the HCT adopted a multi-year HRP aimed at minimising the impact
of the conflict by saving lives and preventing suffering in the areas of highest
need, as well as enhancing preparedness to facilitate timely response to new
and emerging crises. While the overall goals of the HRP remain fundamentally
the same, a combination of relentless violence, as well as grinding poverty and
economic crisis fuelled by the drought, have compounded humanitarian needs
to such an extent that, for some population groups and certain geographic
areas, partners can no longer avoid engaging in a limited set of ‘humanitarianplus’
activities.
Changes to the multi-year strategy
Now in the second year of the 2018-2021 HRP, the
humanitarian situation has significantly deteriorated due to a
drought which has afflicted two-thirds of the country, leaving
3.6 million people in extreme food insecurity,34 and a conflict
which is continuing to evolve in character and tactics to take a
worsening toll on civilians. Across the country, humanitarian
needs are not only being driven by violence, but increasingly
by weak state capacity to manage or mitigate the impact of
natural hazards; economic hardship due to unsustainable
population growth and limited income-generating
opportunities; and the erosion of livelihoods and assets. The
change in context and anticipated evolution of needs has
required that the initial planning assumptions on which the
HRP was based be re-evaluated and that consideration be
given to the inclusion of a limited range of ‘humanitarianplus’
activities which can address specific vulnerabilities
generated by the multi-dimensional crisis now confronting
people.
Scope and priorities
Proposed changes to the scope of humanitarian activities
are not intended to replace development programmes, but
rather to recognise that the initial assumption in the 2018-
2021 HRP35 – that actors engaged in One UN36 programming
would be able to more quickly meet the structural needs
of affected people – has not yet materialised. Indeed,
while millions of people continue to receive humanitarian
assistance, they have yet to benefit from longer-term and
larger-scale government-led investments in basic service
delivery, including the Citizens’ Charter National Priority
Programme (CCNPP), such that they now require additional
support to aid their recovery. As there is, by definition, no
clear distinction between humanitarian and humanitarianplus
activities, the HRP is premised on the fact that different
actions may be more or less geared towards immediate
life-saving outcomes or those which contribute to more
sustainable objectives.
Changes to the scope of humanitarian action are thus not
to be misconstrued as the pursuit of development goals, but
rather are intended to protect people from the consequences
of state fragility; the absence of social safety nets; and
the adoption of increasingly destructive negative coping
mechanisms. Given this, the HCT has agreed to allow a
temporary widening of the current humanitarian parameters
to allow for the following activities to be implemented in
2019:
••Asset creation and livelihoods support to enable droughtaffected
communities who have lost their crops and
livestock to rebuild and/or recover their assets, thereby
facilitating more sustainable returns and reducing the
likelihood that people in rural areas will resort to migration
as a coping mechanism;
••Enhanced physical and mental rehabilitation for trauma
patients to increase their mobility and psychological
recovery, in addition to programmes aimed at improving
greater access to employment opportunities for people with
disabilities.
13 #
PART I: Response strate gy
In broadening the scope of humanitarian action to include
these activities, the multi-year HRP continues to prioritise
saving lives, while at the same time acknowledging that
the humanitarian burden can only be sustainably reduced
through a greater commitment to early recovery and
resilience-building initiatives which bridge short-term
relief and longer-term assistance, and help affected people
achieve self-reliance. Geographic prioritisation will therefore
continue to follow the logic set out in the 2019 HNO which
identifies the most severely affected provinces as Faryab,
Hilmand, Hirat, Kandahar, Nangarhar and Zabul. The plan
also recognises that there may be additional provinces, such
as Badghis, in which multi-sectoral or integrated responses
are required to address needs within specific thematic areas,
such as the drought, independent of whether these provinces
are also adversely affected by conflict, population movement
or limited access to basic services.
Integrated drought response pilot in Badghis province
Notwithstanding the significant humanitarian needs that have been generated as a result of the drought, not all provinces
have been equally affected or have the same number of people suffering from extreme hunger. With 75 per cent of the
population currently experiencing Crisis and Emergency (IPC 3 & 4) levels of food insecurity in Badghis province and a
high prevalence of GAM and poor water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH)-related health issues for a significant proportion
of the population, the Inter Cluster Coordination Team (ICCT) has collectively agreed to pilot an integrated drought
response in four districts - Ab Kamari, Bala Murgahb, Muqur and Qadis – focusing not just on the symptoms of the
problem (food insecurity and malnutrition) but also the underlying causes (health and WASH.
While exact details of the pilot – including targeting criteria, packages of assistance and programme activities - will only be
available in 2019 following regionally-led consultations in Badghis and Hirat, it is envisaged that the primary focus of the
multi-sector response (food, health, nutrition and WASH) will be two-fold: i) to prevent those experiencing IPC 4 levels
of food insecurity (Emergency) from slipping into IPC 5 (Famine); and ii) to ensure that any IPC 3 populations do not fall
back into IPC 4 throughout the latter half of 2019 – in the event that a better harvest supports the natural graduation of
some people to a better food security classification.
Indeed, while higher-levels of rainfall are predicted during the winter season it won’t be clear until the second quarter of
2019 whether this has translated into conducive planting conditions due to it not being known: a) whether the water will
actually be harvested into irrigation reserves or run off straightaway into deforested land / barren soil; b) that families either
had the resources or received assistance in time to plant; and c) that the harvest will provide enough for their food and/
or economic security through the next winter. Regular monitoring of vegetation growth and the food security outlook,
supported by FEWSNET and Food Security and Agriculture cluster (FSAC) analysis in the first quarter of 2019, will
therefore be critical to how the pilot is eventually designed.
Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct
Winter wheat planting Spring wheat planting 2nd season planting Winter wh.
Winter wet season Spring wet season
2nd season harv. Poppy harvest Wheat and barley harvest 2nd harv.
Lean season
Livestock migration to higher elev. Livestock to lower elev.
HHs stock for winter Peak risk of spring flooding Stocking
Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct
SEASONAL CALENDAR
14
PART I: Response strate gy
Validating multi-year planning assumptions
In contrast to the original 2018-2021 plan, which only
outlined the number of PiN, together with targets and
financial requirements for 2018, the updated version presents
these figures for all three remaining years of the response –
see Table I for further details. Developing a genuinely multiyear
outlook which contains plausible projections, however,
has only been possible by basing it on a series of credible,
but by no means certain, assumptions about how events
will unfold.37 It should be noted that people are exposed to
multiple risks and vulnerabilities, and needs may be triggered
or escalate unexpectedly such that a revision to the plan would
become necessary. Reasons for this could include:
••Conflict displacement which is not comparable to recent
years and exceeds current estimations;
••The conduct or outcome of the presidential elections results
in significant levels of civil unrest;
••The right of registered refugees to remain in neighbouring
countries is not respected or the timeframe for repatriation
of undocumented people recently agreed to under the
Afghanistan-Pakistan Action Plan for Peace and Solidarity
(APAPPS) is not followed;
••The occurrence of a major natural disaster, such as a
significant earthquake;
••The impact of the El Niño weather event in 2019; or
••A slide from acute food insecurity levels into famine (See
preparedness efforts underway through the FAM, more
details of which available on page 15).
This plan is therefore intended to serve as a streamlined
response to currently presented or known needs, and to enable
timely and scaled-up responses in the event a new emergency
occurs; it does not attempt to elaborate all possible scenarios,
which would be unrealistic given the multiple factors at
play. What remains critical, however, is that regular situation
monitoring be undertaken to test the continued validity and
relevance of initial planning assumptions. These assumptions
include an expected alleviation in the impact of the drought
in the second half of 2019. Should such an improvement not
materialise or be complicated by El Niño impacts, current
planning figures may need to be adjusted, along with the
activities required to respond to them. Stocktaking exercises
of this kind are essential to ensuring the pertinence, timeliness
and credibility of all humanitarian response plans. Indeed, it
is this very process which led in May 2018 to the first revision
of the 2018-2081 HRP – from 3.3 million people in need to
5.5 million – and again, in November, from 5.5 million to 6.6
million.
Moving forward, and given that the HRP now contains
multi-year projections, quarterly reality checks of initial
planning assumptions will be built into monitoring. This
will be accompanied by greater scrutiny and accountability
of emergency preparedness, such as the stockpiling of
supplies and monitoring of pipelines. Reality checks will
also be informed by the use of satellite imagery, such as
vegetation growth as well as other forecast analyses, including
precipitation levels and snow depths to ensure that seasonal
considerations are factored into the response accordingly. A
planned review of the existing humanitarian architecture in
the first quarter of 2019 will also examine the utility of current
emergency response preparedness (ERP) processes, as well as
related roles and responsibilities. Robust and proactive ERP
approaches are critical in a context such as Afghanistan, where
a major drought is known to occur, on average, every six
years, and whose effects could be better managed or mitigated
with more effective operational planning.
TABLE 1: PEOPLE IN NEED, PEOPLE TO RECEIVE ASSISTANCE
AND FINANCIAL REQUIREMENTS (2019-2021)
2019 6.3M 4.5M 612M
2020 4.3M 3M 465M
2021 3.7M 2.4M 394M
15 #
PART I: Response strate gy
The new way of working
Seventeen years since the 9/11 attacks and 11 years after the
cluster system was first activated in Afghanistan, the need for
a new way of working (NWOW) is not only compelling but
also urgent. In spite of the vast amounts of aid money that
have been spent over the last two decades, key development
indicators are either stagnating or reversing, and current
resources are simply too meagre for the scale of action
required for positive life-changing programming to benefit
the majority of people who need it, at least through the
current approach. For the first time, the 2019 HNO presented
an alternative way of framing the primary humanitarian
needs on the basis of thematic areas38 which do not confine
responses to isolated sectoral approaches but instead promote
collective action and support inter-agency cooperation.
While there are currently limits as to how theoretical
guidance on the NWOW can be applied to Afghanistan in
its present circumstances, some steps have already been
explored in-country, including the alignment of humanitarian
action to the Sustainable Development Goals (see Table II:
Excerpt of the 2018-2021 HRP logframe and One UN results
framework). Collaboration is also ongoing at the technical
level with humanitarian and development actors engaging
in joint planning around the short and longer-term drought
response, including the feasibility of cash-for-livelihoods
programmes. Additional plans in early 2019 include a oneday
workshop of ICCT and Programme Management Team
(PMT)39 members to determine roles and responsibilities for
initial early recovery and resilience-building work.
This will be supported at the strategic level by discussions
among the UN Country Team (UNCT) and HCT on how
the NWOW can be applied and the necessary prerequisites
for the development of collective outcomes, including the
Holistic efforts underway to manage famine risk in Afghanistan
In September 2018, the UN, the World Bank and other key stakeholders announced a collective partnership – the FAM –
aimed at reducing crisis levels of food insecurity by formalising, strengthening and incentivising the links between early
warning, financing and implementation arrangements to enhance famine prevention and mitigation efforts globally.
Selected as one of five ‘first-mover’ countries, Afghanistan held a high-level roundtable in Kabul on 19 November aimed at
exploring how government, humanitarian, development and donor entities could better work together to address growing
food insecurity and water scarcity in a context where humanitarian assistance is limited in both timeframe and scope, and
development for millions of people remains seriously challenged.
Indeed, with acute levels of food insecurity in Afghanistan rising by 30 per cent in just 5 years to affect 13 million people
in 2018 and water storage per capita the lowest in the region, earlier and more accurate data, as well as pre-emptive,
rather than reactive, financing is required to support more consistent early action and reduce exposure to mass hunger.
This is especially the case when it is widely understood that Afghanistan, on average, experiences a major drought once
every six years.
Key takeaways from this roundtable, which was convened by the World Bank and Acting Minister of Finance, H.E.
Mohammad Humayon Qayoumi, included:
1. A recognition that development financing has been concentrated in urban areas, or focused on larger-scale
infrastructure which may overlook the pressing needs of rural, village and mountainous communities;
2. The need to link data with analytics and strengthen communication with decision-makers and affected communities to
provide them with actionable information; and
3. The need to further examine existing financing mechanisms such as the Central Emergency Response Fund (CERF)
and Afghanistan Humanitarian Fund (AHF) to highlight the potential financing gap to be filled by the FAM.
Over the next few months this roundtable will be followed up by a series of technical discussions which seek to develop
a more aligned, holistic plan to address water scarcity, food insecurity and famine risk in Afghanistan and address the
‘missing middle’ – that is, vulnerable and at risk communities who fall between short-term humanitarian (<1 year) and
long-term development (+10 years) responses.
16
PART I: Response strate gy
EXCERPT FROM THE 2018-2021 HRP LOGFRAME AND ONE UN RESULTS
The below excert represents a sample of how outcomes under Afghanistan’s humanitarian and development frameworks are complementary and
contribute to achieving common goals in Afghanistan. For the full HRP logframe see page 59.
HUMANITARIAN RESPONSE PLAN ONE UN FOR AFGHANISTAN FRAMEWORK SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT GOALS
SO 1: Save lives in the areas of highest need
1.3 Conflict IDP, returnee, refugee and women, men
and children of all ages have a minimum household
food consumption score above 42.5
3. Food Security, Nutrition and Livelihoods
3.1 Food insecure populations, including crisis-affected
people, have improved access to safe, nutritious and sufficient
food all year round
2. Zero Hunger
SDG 2.1 By 2030, end hunger and ensure access by all people, in people in vulnerable situations, including infants, to safe, nutritious and sufficient food all year round
SDG 2.2 By 2030, end all forms of malnutrition, including achieving, by 2025, the internationally agreed targets on stunting and wasting in children under 5 years of
age, and address the nutritional needs of adolescent girls, pregnant and lactating women and older persons.
SO2: Reduce protection violations and increase
respect for International Humanitarian Law
1.5 School-aged girls and boys affected by
emergencies can access quality, basic education.
2. Education
2.2 Equitable Access: Increased equitable and inclusive
access to relevant, safe, and quality learning opportunities for
children, youth, and adults in Afghanistan, especially women
and girls.
4. Quality Education
SDG 4.1 By 2030, ensure that all girls and boys complete free, equitable and quality primary and secondary education leading to relevant and effective learning
outcomes.
SO 3: People struck by sudden- and slow-onset
crises get timely assistance
3.1 People affected by natural disasters, including
severe weather conditions, receive timely assistance,
preventing loss of life and minimising the risk of
disease.
3. Food Security, Nutrition, Livelihoods
3.4 Rural communities and authorities have strengthened
capacity to adapt to and mitigate climate change and increased
resilience to cope, prevent and recover from climate-related
and other natural disasters.
4. Health
4.4 Health Emergencies: reduced death, illness and
disability in the most acutely vulnerable population while
complementing and strengthening existing health institutions
to adequately prepare for and respond to conflicts, outbreaks
and natural disaster-related health crises.
5. Return and Reintegration
5.5 Access of the returnees, displaced populations and host
communities to the infrastructural services in areas of high
return and displacement, including (or particularly) in the
returnee townships, is enhanced
1. No Poverty
2. Zero Hunger
3. Good Health and Well-being
SDG 1.5 By 2030, build the resilience of the poor and those in vulnerable situations and reduce their exposure and vulnerability to climate-related extreme events and
other economic, social and environmental shocks and disasters
SDG 2.4 By 2030, ensure sustainable food production systems and implement resilient agricultural practices that increase productivity and production, that help
maintain ecosystems, that strengthen capacity for adaptation to climate change, extreme weather, drought, flooding and other disasters and that progressively improve
land and soil quality.
SDG 3.13 Strengthen the capacity of all countries, in particular developing countries, for early warning, risk reduction and management of national and global health
risks.
articulation of a common understanding of critical needs
and response priorities across the country. The HRP will
also draw upon engagement with national and international
frameworks, including the National IDP Policy and the
Global Compacts on Refugees and Migration to support
durable solutions to internal and regional displacement and
the eventual transition of responsibilities to government
authorities.
17 #
PART I: Cross-cutting Issues
CROSS-CUTTING
ISSUES
Centrality of protection
The scale and complexity of the crisis in Afghanistan have
affected the population in diverse ways, with the scope,
duration and intensity of needs manifesting differently in
people depending on their circumstances. Among the 6.3
million people now in need across the country, the most
vulnerable are increasingly the rural poor; minority groups
(particularly the Shi’a Muslim community); those exposed to
forced, multiple and often extended periods of displacement;
as well as children, female-headed households and young
men. The multi-year humanitarian response therefore
remains committed to ensuring that people are at the centre
of humanitarian action and that all assistance is planned
and implemented in such a way that their safety, dignity and
rights are upheld. Humanitarian partners will be guided
in their response by more robust analysis of protection
risks and human rights abuses, supported through the
recently-established Protection Incident Monitoring System
(PIMS)40 currently being piloted in the western region, and
complemented by the HCT protection strategy that was
endorsed in 2018.41
Implementing a response that has people at its centre and
which is defined by the priority protection concerns that
they have identified - rather than being driven by what
humanitarian actors can tangibly deliver in a short timeframe
- will likely, however, require a shift in programmatic
approach and resourcing. A reduction in geographical
footprint and field-level staffing across Afghanistan in recent
years has diluted partners’ ability to retain close proximity to
affected people, understand their main humanitarian needs,
and engage in more upstream work which could prevent
protection violations and avert costly response efforts.
Recent attacks on Hazara strongholds in Ghazni province, for
example, have reaffirmed the extent to which communities
themselves have the knowledge and networks to make
informed decisions about their own safety and well-being. The
timing of counter-offensives, which are often accompanied by
air strikes and house-to-house search operations, is frequently
known in advance and their impact on civilians could be
mitigated if humanitarian actors were in a better position to
negotiate or establish people’s safe passage out. With changing
strategies on the battlefield suggesting that rural populations
may be increasingly exposed to siege-like conditions, where
connecting roads to cities and escape routes are blocked-off,
there can be no substitute for protection by presence.
Ever-evolving conflict demands that a similarly agile and
proactive advocacy approach be adopted. Indeed, with
attacks on education and healthcare facilities now an almost
daily occurrence; sectarian and ethnic-based violence on
the rise; and perfidious acts more common,42 dual actions
which enhance the prevention of protection violations – as
opposed to merely responding to their consequences – are
urgently required. In this regard, the HCT will both prioritise
messaging which promotes respect for IHL and IHRL, as well
as support specific programmes which safeguard especially
vulnerable people from harm. This includes practical
measures to upgrade the physical safety of school buildings
and mine-risk awareness for teachers to help them detect
improvised explosive devices (IEDs), in addition to ongoing
advocacy with the Government which is a signatory to the
2015 Safe Schools Declaration. The HCT will therefore elevate
protection issues which require higher-level engagement to
the Senior Level Working Group on Protection of Civilians
established in 2016.43 The reinvigoration of this forum, which
has only met twice in the past two years, will be essential to
the success of future advocacy efforts.44
At the same time, the humanitarian response must continue
to account for the fact that there is currently no realistic
prospect of engaging certain NSAGs, such as Daesh/ISK, in
a dialogue on respect for IHL and IHRL. Survivor-based care
will thus remain a critical component of the response and, in
some areas – such as post-operative physical and psychosocial
rehabilitation – need to be strengthened to ensure that those
with life-changing injuries and/or disabilities are not further
disadvantaged.
Gender, age and disability-sensitive programming
Both men and women have paid a heavy price as a result
of the ongoing conflict, although the costs have been borne
differently. Conditions for women both in and outside the
home have comprehensively deteriorated as suicide attacks,
recruitment of male family members into the armed forces,
and economic migration abroad have deprived them of
breadwinners, social support networks and even, in some
cases, security.45 Female-headed households are more likely
to be food insecure than male-headed households,46 and are
twice as likely to be in debt than their male counterparts when
displaced.47 At the same time, unsustainably high dependency
ratios – 47.5 per cent of the population is aged 15 or below
and therefore considered economically dependent – have
18
PART I: Cross-cutting Issues
systemically undermined savings and meant that whatever
income exists must automatically be consumed in order for
the family to subsist.48
Men and young boys, on the other hand, make up more
than half of all trauma victims; 96 per cent of all returnees
from Iran, including 93 per cent of deportees;49 and are more
likely to experience physical violence at the hands of parents,
teachers and relatives as children.50 At the same time, at least
six million school-age children are engaged in child labour,
while minors are estimated to make up half of the population
with disabilities.51
Ensuring that humanitarian assistance is appropriately
tailored to meet the distinct needs of women, men, girls and
boys in a way that accommodates their physical and mental
well-being will not only be critical to their immediate survival
therefore, but also their capacity to meaningfully engage with
and contribute to society in the future. This is particularly
important in a context such as Afghanistan where there is a
significant youth bulge and the demand for jobs outstrips the
available opportunities among certain age cohorts to such an
extent that increased conflict is a possible result.52
In this regard, while preventing exposure to violence,
abuse and exploitation and the adoption of harmful coping
strategies will remain paramount to the HRP, the response
will also prioritise a set of targeted livelihoods activities for
some population groups, such as drought-affected, rural poor
men and women. Humanitarian actors will also work with
development partners to sequence their activities to ensure
that these individuals are picked-up in longer-term and
poverty-reduction programming, which is ultimately better
suited to realising fundamental change in people’s lives than
one-off packages of humanitarian assistance.
At an operational level, humanitarian action in Afghanistan
will also remain committed to fully integrating gender,
age and disability considerations into all components of
the humanitarian programme cycle - from assessments to
planning, as well as implementation and monitoring. Already
in the first year of the 2018-2021 HRP, partners have made
significant strides in collecting, using and analysing gender
and age specific data, ensuring that the gender with age
marker (GAM) is incorporated into the methodology and
design of nationwide surveys such as the WoA Assessment.
This has yielded sex and age disaggregated data (SADD) for
all population groups included in the 2019 HNO, as well as
critical information relating to the presence of additional key
vulnerabilities within the household, such as disabled and
chronically ill members or pregnant and lactating women
(PLW).
In order to reduce gender bias in assessments, and in
recognition of the fact that 94 per cent of all households
in Afghanistan are headed by men,53 the humanitarian
community has also undertaken numerous women-only focus
group discussions to supplement the collection of quantitative
data with qualitative information so as to better articulate and
address their needs within the response. Efforts to reach more
women and girls by increasing the number of female frontline
workers – be it in healthcare delivery or protection from
sexual and gender-based violence (SGBV) – are also being
actively pursued. Good practices from partners operating
outside the HRP are currently being explored as potential
models, although expectations must be tempered given the
limited mobility of women, particularly in rural areas, when
not accompanied by a male mahram (a male relative with
whom contact is permissible).
Measures which are already ongoing to redress existing
imbalances and recruit more women into humanitarian action
include the hiring of husband-and-wife as well as brotherand-
sister teams, and using government contacts to identify
female candidates (as this often reassures families that their
involvement in these activities is acceptable). The resumption
of the Gender in Humanitarian Action Task Force (GiHATF),
which has been dormant for much of 2018 following high
levels of staff turnover, will play an important part in ensuring
the success of these initiatives moving forward.
Accountability to affected populations and
community engagement
Engaging women, men and youth more meaningfully
in humanitarian action will continue to be an integral
feature of the response. In 2018, humanitarian partners
undertook a series of steps to develop a more comprehensive
understanding of the needs and concerns of affected people
and to ensure that these are appropriately reflected in the
HNO and in programme implementation, including gender
dimensions. This has ranged from their direct participation
in nationwide and sector-specific assessments, key informant
interviews and focus group discussions, through to
incorporating feedback and complaints into the response
effort, and taking any necessary course corrections as a result.
Humanitarian partners have also reached-out to affected
people through perception surveys of both women and men,
to enable them to better determine their level of satisfaction
with assistance received – both in terms of amount and
appropriateness of the modality.
19 #
PART I: Cross-cutting Issues
More frequent and interactive communication with
communities is just one component of accountability to
affected people, however, and more proactively involving them
in decisions which affect their lives – giving them greater
agency rather than reducing them to passive recipients of
aid – will be critical to meeting Grand Bargain commitments
associated with the ‘participation revolution’.
This is challenging in a context where much of what the
population needs and desires (particularly in droughtaffected
communities) lies outside the remit of humanitarian
action – for example, improved rural irrigation systems
and infrastructure,54 or better employment opportunities.55
Nevertheless, practical steps which can be taken to assist
affected people in accessing basic goods and services which
support their initial recovery, without actually undertaking
the work of development partners or substituting for the
role of the government, include: the construction of smallscale
water harvesting schemes; targeted programmes
which rehabilitate agricultural land and animal shelters; and
facilitating ‘go and see’ visits for drought IDPs to potential
return areas.
Regular consultation with communities will be an essential
part of this process and key to mobilising a more effective,
relevant and accountable response. To support this work, in
June 2018 the ICCT established a Community Engagement
Working Group (CEWG), currently chaired by UNOPS
and co-chaired by WFP, aimed at integrating community
engagement and accountability into the humanitarian
programme cycle to promote informed decision-making and
enhance local empowerment. Initial mapping of community
engagement activities carried out by the CEWG in June 2018
demonstrated a priority need for the following:
1. Engagement with communities in harder-to-reach areas
and locations impacted by high levels of displacement and
significant return;
2. More specific information to be provided by humanitarians
to affected people about the response, including the
activities agencies are implementing, the targeting criteria
being used and the duration of assistance;
3. Promotion of community structures and the incorporation
of local capacities and participation;
4. The establishment of Accountability to Affected Populations
(AAP) focal points at the local level; and
5. The allocation of dedicated resources (personnel, funds)
to support the mainstreaming of community engagement,
including a single-hatted working group coordinator and
strengthening of inter-agency mechanisms for reporting
sexual exploitation and abuse (SEA).
In October 2018, the Awaaz56 call centre received its first
allegation of SEA, the referral of which highlighted, at
a minimum, the need for concerted efforts by agencies
operating in Afghanistan to establish a centralised mechanism
for protection from sexual exploitation and abuse (PSEA) and
an agreed inter-agency referral pathway. Plans are already
underway to address the latter by potentially using Awaaz as
the channel for the collation of PSEA cases and trend analysis,
along with more regular meetings of the existing PSEA
Taskforce.
The UN will also ensure that existing mechanisms for staff
who may face exploitation and abuse in the workplace are
fully effective and are as accessible and responsive as possible.
In this regard, consideration will be given to building upon
the 12 recommendations of the UN Gender and Sexual
Harassment Survey completed at the end of 2017, including
the reinforcement of gender policies and commitments to
ensure staff understand the need for gender equality and
parity, and increased support to young female national staff,
such as through the establishment of dedicated focal points
to increase protection and mitigate the risk of discrimination
and harassment.
Market-based response modalities
Cash and market-based responses have been implemented in
Afghanistan since 2009 with the value widely acknowledged
by the HCT – both in terms of cost-efficiency and
effectiveness, as well as the improved dignity, flexibility and
choice it offers to affected people. Already in 2018, $21 million
has been disbursed in cash-based transfers57 to 800,000 people
covering a range of basic needs, including food, shelter, as
well as NFI, fuel, and health expenditures and transportation
under the Survival Minimum Expenditure Basket (SMEB).58
While this represents a 50 per cent reduction on the $43.3
million distributed to 900,000 people in 2017, the reduction
is primarily due to the three-quarters drop in documented
refugee returnees from Pakistan entitled to UNHCR’s
repatriation grant in 2018, and to changes in the targeting
procedures of the Emergency Response Mechanism (ERM)
consortium of partners which saw a reduced timeframe
for eligibility and the introduction of a two-tier assistance
package for vulnerable households.59
2018 also saw an increased use of mixed modality responses
that reduced the ERM partners’ multi-purpose cash provision,
when compared to the full cash packages provided in 2017.
In keeping with 2018 trends, cash- and vouchers-for-food
remained the most common type of transfer – representing
69 per cent of the total – followed by multi-purpose cash (23
20
PART I: Cross-cutting Issues
per cent) and cash-for-shelter construction (8 per cent). As
in previous years, targeted groups included conflict IDPs,
returnees (both documented and undocumented) and, for the
first time, drought-affected communities (both displaced and
non-displaced).
While underlying market conditions in Afghanistan are
generally conducive to cash programming – with markets
being mostly accessible to affected people (who tend to
be concentrated in urban or peri-urban centres); highly
functional even in insecure environments; and able to
bounce-back quickly from shocks, the decision to provide
cash needs to take into account a number of different factors.
Considerations of efficiency – given the time required to
mobilise, transport and distribute in-kind goods for example
- must be balanced against considerations of do no harm;
financial service providers’ operational reach; effectiveness (in
ensuring the intended humanitarian outcome) and protection
risks/opportunities.
Indeed, the role of cash as a pull factor in Hirat and Qala-e-
Naw provincial capitals during the recent drought response
has highlighted the importance of having a nuanced, informed
and critical approach to the use of cash in humanitarian
programming. In repsonse to increasingly tense relations
between local authorities, host communities and IDPs after
initial cash distributions, partners decided not to provide the
standard multi-purpose cash grant normally given to conflict
IDPs ($375 per household), but rather smaller, sector-specific
grants (such as cash-for-food grants of $80 per household).
The rationale for this was that smaller grants would make it
less likely that rural households would migrate to Hirat or
Qala-e-Naw cities for $80 than they would for $375.
Given the recent drought response experience, in 2019 the
Cash and Vouchers Working Group (CVWG) will lead a
detailed discussion within the humanitarian community
on the specific conditions and considerations that need to
be taken into account when deciding on cash-versus-inkind
assistance, in line with Grand Bargain commitments
and specific contextual factors in Afghanistan. The CVWG
will also explore possibilities for using cash-for-livelihoods
as part of drought-related recovery efforts, while further
streamlining timely and accurate reporting of cash-based
transfer programmes to ensure accurate data on the types,
scale and location of these programmes across the country,
as well as capturing geographic and temporal trends. In line
with recommendation three of the global SIDA evaluation of
cash inclusion in HRPs, the updated 2018-2021 HRP includes
sector-specific cash targets, by activity and beneficiary
category, indicating the share of assistance each cluster plans
to provide in cash.60
21 #
PART I: Cross-cutting Issues
Strategic use of pooled funds & local empowerment
Pooled funding has been fundamental in addressing critical humanitarian priorities across Afghanistan in 2018
including drought-related needs, winterisation and emergency trauma care. Overall, the AHF and the CERF have
disbursed a combined total of $76.7 million, to 41 partners (12 national NGOs, 22 international NGOs and 7 UN
agencies) through 2 AHF standard allocations, 6 AHF reserve allocations and 1 CERF rapid response allocation. These
allocations enabled 84 projects, providing life-saving humanitarian assistance to 3.5 million beneficiaries. Overall,
pooled funds represented 17 per cent of all funding received towards the HRP in 2018 ($460 million against a revised
requirement of 599 million). The AHF is essential to kick-starting life-saving activities included under the HRP, while
the CERF is critical in responding to new or unforeseen emergencies. In 2019, it is envisaged that the AHF will provide
seed funding to initiate the integrated drought response pilot in Badghis province, which is aimed at preventing those
currently experiencing Emergency (IPC 4) levels of food insecurity from deteriorating further, and supporting early
recovery and resilience-building to protect affected communities from further shocks.
Significant investments have been made by the humanitarian community in 2018 to enhance engagement with national
NGOs, ensuring wider coverage by and increased sustainability of humanitarian action. This has manifested itself in a
number of ways, including:
1. More than doubling the number of national NGO partners eligible to receive AHF funding from 22 in 2017 to 46 in
2018, mainly due to a revised due diligence process;
2. The use of 17 national NGO partners as enumerators in the WoA Assessment, funded by the United Kingdom’s
Department for International Development (DFID) with the support of the Agency Coordinating Body for Afghan
Relief and Development (ACBAR)’s twinning programme, thereby building the assessment capacity of local
counterparts.
With worsening security in 2019 a possibility, along with a contraction in the UN and NGO footprint, it is likely that
national partners will become increasingly critical to the response and that further investments in capacity-building will
be required. This will range from efforts to improve their technical and core management skills, through to developing
and managing financial and accountability frameworks, as well as understanding of and ability to operate within
humanitarian principles. Continued engagement with the ACBAR twinning programme, which pairs national NGO and
international partners through peer mentoring schemes, will be an essential part of this process.
22
PART I: Humanitarian Acce ss
HUMANITARIAN
ACCESS
Constraints and limitations on humanitarian access continue to pose a challenge
to the delivery of assistance across Afghanistan, with organisations facing a
range of obstacles to the movement of personnel and goods due to ongoing
conflict, administrative requirements imposed by both government and NSAG
members, and restricted road travel. With the presence of the State receding in
many areas, context-sensitive strategies which engage all parties to the conflict
in a safe, coordinated and principled manner are increasingly required by the
humanitarian community.
Deteriorating security has adversely affected humanitarian
space across Afghanistan in 2018. The ability of aid workers to
move staff and assets throughout the country has increasingly
been hampered by insecurity along key transit routes (Kabul
to Kandahar, Kandahar to Hirat, Hirat to Badghis, Kandahar
to Tirinkot and Faizabad to Maimana), including the
establishment of non-government checkpoints, resulting in
a greater reliance on air transport which is both costly and
time-consuming to arrange. Critical humanitarian supplies
such as tents and mine clearance equipment have also been
held at border points as authorities have demanded tax
payments, while lengthy memorandum of understanding
(MoU) procedures for the approval of humanitarian
projects have led to significant delays in the start-up and
implementation of emergency response activities which
should be exempt from this requirement under Article 23 of
the NGO law. Reports of NSAGs pressuring NGOs to pay tax
in exchange for access to areas and affected people have also
been increasing.
At the operational level, the environment has become equally
inhospitable to humanitarian action, negatively affecting the
reach of partners. In 2018, violence against humanitarian
personnel, assets and facilities continued to be the most
reported of all access constraints, with this incident type
comprising more than half (52 per cent) of all incidents
reported so far this year, an increase of 12 percentage points
on 2017.61 Of particular concern has been the increase in
threats and intimidation against aid workers operating in
the education, health and demining sectors in Nangarhar,
Farah and Uruzgan provinces – some of which have
translated into actual violence – and which have led to the
suspension of related programme activities. Other constraints
reported in 2018 include: interference in the implementation
of humanitarian activities (17 per cent); restriction or
obstruction of people’s access to services and assistance
(10 per cent); as well as military operations and ongoing
hostilities (10 per cent).
Although humanitarian access-related challenges are
widespread, geographically the highest number of reports
come from the eastern, southern and western regions,
including Nangarhar (49), Kabul (29), Zabul (20), Badghis
(19) and Kandahar (18) – all provinces where a high number
of IDPs and aid workers are concentrated, negatively
impacting project implementation.
The humanitarian access group (HAG) remains the
primary forum in Afghanistan through which operational
coordination takes place to analyse and discuss humanitarian
access issues. Priority issues for the HAG in 2019 include
greater negotiations with parties to the conflict on road
access, interference in programming, and taxation requests,
as well as technical support for ongoing efforts to amend the
NGO Law to provide a transparent and simplified process that
expedites endorsement of short-term emergency projects.
ACCESS-RELATED INCIDENTS (2018)
8 (3%)
9 (3%)
14 (5%)
31 (10%)
32 (10%)
54 (17%)
161 (52%)
Denial of the existence of humanitarian
needs
Presence of landmines/UXO
Restriction of movement within the
country
Military operations and ongoing
hostilities
Restriction/obstruction of people
access to services and assistance
Interference in the implementation of
humanitarian activities
Violence against humanitarian
personnel/assets/facilities
23 #
PART I: Humanitarian Acce ss
In 2018, new opportunities have emerged for both direct and
indirect humanitarian negotiations with parties to the conflict.
Both government and NSAG representatives have recently
emphasised their willingness to allow cross-line operations
to alleviate human suffering, particularly in drought-affected
areas. In this regard, the HAG continues to support a
humanitarian environment that fosters a more open dialogue
around engaging with NSAGs for improved humanitarian
outcomes. This will be supported through the sharing of
best practices regarding communication with NSAGs and
clarifying organisational positions on engagement, as well
as efforts to build the capacity and confidence of field-based
colleagues to engage directly in negotiations. In addition to
encouraging principled humanitarian engagement, the HAG
will also continue to collect and analyse information on access
trends to support evidence-based advocacy with the donor
community, humanitarian coordination entities and local
authorities.
Badakhshan
Badghis
Baghlan
Balkh
Bamyan
Daykundi
Farah
Faryab
Ghazni
Ghor
Hilmand
Hirat
Jawzjan
Kabul
Kandahar
Kapisa
Khost
Kunar
Kunduz
Laghman
Logar
Nangarhar
Nimroz
Nuristan
Paktika
Paktya
Panjsher
Parwan
Samangan
Sar-e-Pul
Takhar
Uruzgan
Maidan
Wardak
Zabul
INDIA
IRAN
PAKIsTAN
TAJIKIsTAN
TURKMENIsTAN
UZBEKIsTAN
CHINA
JAMMU AND
KAsHMIR
Kabul
Conflict Severity
— +
Hard to reach districts
CONVERGENCE BETWEEN CONFLICT SEVERITY AND ACCESS CHALLENGES
Conflict severity is derived from three indicators - armed clashes and air strikes, conflict-induced displacement and civilian casualties recorded over the past year.
24
PART I: Operati onal capacity
OPERATIONAL
CAPACITY
In 2018, the number of partners managing or implementing projects across
Afghanistan has increased to 166.* Despite this, concerted efforts are still
needed to consolidate field presence, particularly in more rural and remote
locations, where needs are currently the greatest.
Currently there are 83 national NGOs and 72 international
NGOs, as well as 11 UN organisations participating in
the humanitarian response. Overall, some 34 partners are
operating in the western region (20 per cent of the total).
These are primarily concentrated in Hirat rather than Badghis
province given the former’s status as a major population
centre and hub, despite Badghis being the source of most
drought-related displacement in 2018. The integrated drought
response pilot planned for four districts (Ab Kamari, Bala
Murgahb, Muqur and Qadis) of Badghis province in early
2019 is expected to address some of these existing imbalances,
however, and improve response coverage across multiple
sectors, at the same time as expanding geographic footprint.
Outside of the drought response, humanitarian presence is
well established in the 5 additional provinces where needs
are the most severe (Faryab, Hilmand, Kandahar, Nangarhar
and Zabul), with Nangarhar and Kandahar particularly well
served, where at least 6 partners, operate in 55 per cent of
both provinces. In 2018, humanitarian assistance delivered
to these five provinces represented close to a third of all aid
delivered in Afghanistan. Furthermore, operational response
capacity in hard-to-reach districts influenced or controlled by
NSAGs, including in Hilmand and Faryab has also increased
somewhat in 2018: Hilmand now has 30 per cent of districts
with more than 5 partners (a 20 per cent increase on last
year), while Faryab has a partner presence in all its districts,
compared to 2017 when there were no partners in more than
a third of districts. The increase in operational capacity in
hard-to-reach areas has been facilitated by dedicated funding
provided by the AHF to support project implementation
across 45 selected districts, and a greater investment in
partnerships with national NGOs, including through subcontracting
and sub-implementing arrangements.
Moving forward, the humanitarian response may have to rely
more extensively on national NGOs – who currently comprise
half of all active organisations under the coordinated
humanitarian response – such that systematic capacitybuilding,
including trainings and mentoring schemes,
will need to be both adequately resourced and regularly
undertaken. Indeed, innovative approaches which encourage
the willingness of partners to not only ‘stay and deliver’ but
also to ‘enter and stay’ will be required, given that operational
capacity and the reach of partners in Afghanistan is closely
linked to sustained and unfettered humanitarian access,
adequate and predictable resourcing from donors, and the
ability to retain necessary staff in areas where the needs are
the greatest.
The ongoing presence of Daesh/ISK in Nangarhar province
will therefore continue to serve as a major test of the resolve
of humanitarian actors operating there. Of the 72 aid workers
killed (23) and injured (49) so far in 2018, almost a third
of these occurred in Nangarhar province alone, mainly as a
result of Daesh/ISK attacks in Jalalabad City. The fact that
NGOs are considered legitimate targets by Daesh/ISK –
not because they are NGOs but because they are foreign,
including national actors who receive international donor
funding – has led to number of them reconsidering the
sustainability of their operations in the area.
Number of districts
Provinces wi-th the most severe humanitarian needs
Number of organisations per district: 11 or more 6-10 3-5 1-2 0
2
1
1
1
1
1
1
3
2
1
2
6
3
10
11
3
4
4
1
2
2
3
2
10
1
1
3
11
5
6
1
1
1
1
3
17
1
5
2
6
2
6
2
5
1
1
2
1
2
10
6
2
4
6
0 5 10 15 20
Kabul
Nimroz
Ghazni
Badghis
Baghlan
Balkh
Uruzgan
Kunduz
Farah
Faryab
Zabul
Hilmand
Kandahar
Hirat
Nangarhar
NUMBER OF OPERATIONAL PARTNERS PER DISTRICT
*Only 158 participate in regional level Humanitarian Response Teams
(HRTs).
25 #
PART I: Operati onal capacity
Given that NGOs currently operate in every district of
Nangarhar province – in 2017 it accounted for 17 per
cent (700,000) of all beneficiaries reached nationally– any
significant withdrawal or contraction would have major
consequences for the humanitarian response and for affected
people. Thus, greater investments in risk management, the
development of access and NSAG engagement strategies
and remote management techniques, as well as contingency
planning, will all be prioritised in 2019.
!
!!!!!!!!
!
!
! ! !
!!
!!
! !
! !!
! ! !
! ! !
!!!
! !
!! !
!!
!!
!
!
!
!
! ! !
!! ! !
!!!!! !! ! ! ! ! !
!
!! !
!
!
!
!
!
! ! !
!
! ! ! !!
! !!
! !
!
!
! ! !! !
!!! !!!! ! !!!
!
!
Badakhshan
Badghis
Baghlan
Balkh
Bamyan
Daykundi
Farah
Faryab
ghazni
wardak
ghor
Hilmand
Hirat
Jawzjan
Kandahar
Parwan Kapisa
Khost
Kunduz
laghman
Nangarhar
Nimroz
Nuristan
Kunar
Paktika
Paktya
logar
samangan Panjsher
sar-e-Pul
Takhar
Uruzgan
Zabul
INDIA
PAKIsTAN
IRAN
TAJIKIsTAN
TURKMENIsTAN
UZBEKIsTAN
CHINA
JAMMU AND
KAsHMIR
Kabul
47
26
5
6 8
7
14
21 35
12
15
3
7
18
16
18
11
9
26
6
3
5
12
12
11
12 5
26 22
20
15
29 25
22
Sources: Humanitarian partners
through the Humanitarian
Regional Teams
# of humanitarian partners per district
— +
# of humanitarian partners
per province
2 5 10 15 >15
ACTIVE HUMANITARIAN
PARTNERS
166
26
PART I: Response Monitoring
RESPONSE
MONITORING
Partners will continue to undertake regular response monitoring to measure
progress against multi-year targets outlined in the logframe, and assess the
performance and value of humanitarian action. Programmatic adjustments will
also be made to the response as dictated by the situation on the ground, to
ensure that it is aligned with the nature and scale of the needs present.
In 2018, the HRP was revised twice: first in May following
the declaration of drought and again in November following
publication of findings from the Emergency Food Security
Assessment (EFSA) which showed that the impact of the
drought was worse than initially thought. Being able to make
time-sensitive and evidence-based changes to the HRP will
remain fundamental to retaining a flexible and agile response
over the next three years, and to ensuring that assistance is
directed to the people and areas that need it the most, in a
manner that is consistent with humanitarian principles.
In this regard, the HRP will continue to operate as a living
document that can incorporate changes in needs, planning
assumptions, targets and financial requirements, as necessary.
A shift in the information-management approach will also be
made, moving away from dense situation reporting towards
the creation of more analytical products which support
effective prioritisation and strategic decision-making, such
as issues-based or thematic dashboards, as well as successful
advocacy and resource mobilisation efforts.
One year into the multi-year response plan however, progress
against results remains mixed. Sectors continue to face
challenges in obtaining comprehensive and high-quality
indicator and target reporting from partners due to a variety
of factors, including: limited access to conflict-affected areas
for monitoring purposes; limited staff resources; and limited
understanding or awareness of reporting systems. Overall,
some 14 out 85 indicators included in the original logframe
were not reported against at all in the first half of 2018, while
25 others set either no baselines or no targets against which to
track progress.
In order to rectify this and ensure a more accountable and
relevant response for affected populations and donors alike,
the clusters have recently been engaged in an exercise to
remove obsolete indicators and replace or amend others,
and provide updated and complete information for related
datasets (i.e. baselines and targets). The results of this exercise
can be found in the updated logframe on pg. 59.
Combined, these challenges have revealed how incredibly
hard it is in a protracted and complex context such as
Afghanistan to have an impact on the underlying or structural
causes of need; measuring this progress is even harder. While
the humanitarian community will thus continue to strive
to measure strategic objectives and outcomes in terms of
the overall reduction in need and vulnerability, in line with
Grand Bargain commitments, expectations must be tempered
by ground realities, particularly given the lack of a proven
HUMANITARIAN PROGRAMMING CYCLE TIMELINE
HRP Dashboard
Drought Dashboard
Humanitarian Snapshot
Monitoring Report
Humanitarian Needs Overview
Humanitarian Response Plan
JAN FEB MAR APR MAY JUN JUL AUG SEP OCT NOV DEC JAN
2019 2020
27 #
PART I: Response Monitoring
monitoring and evaluation methodology for doing so and
limited prospects for longer-term handover to government
and development counterparts.
Reporting
The ICCT and HCT will monitor the response on a quarterly
basis with related reports and data made publicly available
at https://www.humanitarianresponse.info/en/operations/
afghanistan. In-depth periodic monitoring reports will
be published bi-annually: at the mid-point at the end of
quarter two, to inform planning figures, priority activities
and budget revisions for the second half of the year; and
at the end of quarter one of the following year to evaluate
the previous 12 months. These will be supplemented by the
publication of two HRP dashboards (at the end of quarter one
and three) which summarise achievements to date against a
select set of indicators. Monitoring will be undertaken at the
activity, output and outcome level. The HCT will ensure that
challenges and recommendations for action identified through
monitoring are collectively addressed to ensure the effective
delivery of humanitarian assistance.
Throughout the year, support and trainings will also be
provided to donors and cluster partners to ensure that
financial contributions towards the HRP are accurately
reflected through the Financial Tracking Service (FTS) in a
timely manner, including sector-specific breakdowns, so as to
enable strategic allocations from the AHF to be made.
28
PART I: Consequences of Underfunding
CONSEQUENCES OF
UNDERFUNDING
Late or insufficient funding for the multi-year HRP will undermine efforts to
respond comprehensively to the drought, not only in areas of displacement,
but also of origin – where needs are arguably much greater. It will also place
undue stress on already over-burdened communities hosting large numbers
of IDPs and returnees, while compromising preparedness in a country that is
among the most vulnerable in the world to climate change impacts62 and other
sudden-onset shocks. The effect of this is not only that lives may be lost in the
short, medium and longer-term, but that agencies will be caught in a perpetual
cycle of short-term aid delivery rather than focusing on efforts to reduce risk or
vulnerabilities over time and ultimately, therefore, drive down overall need.
When an operation is underfunded this tends not to result
in a proportional cut across the board to all activities
such that they are equally affected, but rather that limited
humanitarian financing is invariably directed towards lifesaving
activities: towards emergency trauma care in the
aftermath of a suicide bombing; towards the treatment of
SAM in children under five; or towards the provision of initial
relief packages for families fleeing violence or instability.
While this is an appropriate, prioritised response to a funding
shortfall, it comes with significant costs to human dignity
and to initiatives focused on preparedness and sustainability
which seek to pre-empt or reduce the need for humanitarian
assistance over time.
This is not only a question of aggregate funding; the
timeliness is also critical, since delayed disbursements can
have a serious impact on the ability to meet time-bound
needs – for example, those which may be influenced by
seasonality (including winterisation and production cycles)
– and which therefore go either completely unaddressed or
are inadequately dealt with if disruptions or discontinuities in
service provision occur.
In line with the above, the humanitarian community in
Afghanistan has identified the following consequences of
underfunding across a number of different areas in 2019 and
beyond:
Drought-induced displacement may become both an
acute and chronic problem, and food insecurity levels
may worsen: Currently more than 220,000 people live in
undignified and harmful conditions across 19 displacement
sites in Badghis and Hirat provinces due to loss of livelihoods
and assets in their areas of origin. Over three million more
remain in their rural communities, where they are severely
food insecure and have limited or no purchasing power to
improve their current conditions. Without sustained and
complementary humanitarian support over at least the next
year to enable them to recover lost assets and re-establish
economic opportunities, these populations could be exposed
to ever-more extreme levels of food insecurity and be forced
to increasingly rely on negative coping mechanisms, such as
exploitative work and migration to urban centres, in order
to survive. Rather than alleviating their needs, these coping
mechanisms often only serve to compound them and often
disproportionately affect the young, the elderly and the
infirm.
Voluntary and sustainable returns are not be possible: In
areas where the security situation is conducive to return, IDPs
and people who have newly-arrived home in Afghanistan
may be reluctant or unable to do so because housing and
infrastructure have been damaged or destroyed by fighting;
safe water supplies are simply not available or are inadequate;
and the health or education facilities are not in place to
support the number of people requiring these services. This
is particularly the case in provinces experiencing substantial
population inflows, such as Jawzjan and Nimroz – where IDPs
and returnees now make up 40 per cent of all residents63 –
and where there is already considerable strain on existing
resources. Recent mapping of under-served districts carried
out by the Health cluster found that 46 per cent of the
population in Nimroz cannot access health services by any
means, while 52 per cent lack access to secondary referral
care.64
29 #
PART I: Consequences of Underfunding
Preparedness actions required to adequately manage
and respond to a sudden influx of returnees are not
implemented: While the estimated number of returnees
to Afghanistan in need of humanitarian assistance in 2019
remains relatively low at 149,000,65 arrival rates remain subject
to regional political and economic dynamics such that a
sudden surge in returns cannot be ruled out.66 At present,
preparedness activities – including the physical expansion
of reception sites at border points in Nimroz and Kandahar
provinces and scaling-up of services within host communities
– are unable to take place due to insufficient resourcing.
Based on a contingency planning exercise undertaken in
2018, humanitarian partners estimate that it would cost
approximately $10 million to improve post-arrival facilities
at the Spin Boldak border point (expected to receive 30 per
cent of all returnees from Pakistan) and extend essential
support to local communities, including livelihoods assistance
and equipping the district hospital with life-saving medical
supplies.
Over the past few months, OCHA has been working with
partners to ensure that financial contributions are both
regularly reported and accurately reflected through the FTS in
a timely manner. This has included bilateral follow-ups with
donors and additional trainings – or FTS clinics – to cluster
and NGO partners. In 2019, a particular focus will be given
to national NGOs, which are generally less familiar with the
process and have less capacity to meet reporting requirements.
30
PART I: Summar y of needs , targets & re quire ments
SUMMARY OF
NEEDS, TARGETS &
REQUIREMENTS
PEOPLE IN NEED
6.3M
REQUIREMENTS (US$)
612M
PEOPLE TO TO BE ASSISTED
4.5M
*Children (<18 years old), men, women (adults, >18 years). **Total figure is not the total of the column, as the same people may appear several times. ***Total also includes UNHAS & Coordination.
BREAKDOWN OF PEOPLE TO BE ASSISTED
100 | 0 | 0%
60 | 20 | 20%
59 | 20 | 21%
59 | 20 | 21%
78 | 22 | 0%
71 | 16 | 13%
59 | 20 | 21%
59 | 20 | 21%
60 | 20 | 20%
0.4M
4.1M
-
-
-
4.3M
-
-
8.8M
33.8M
48.3M
278.8M
51.4M
57.6M
44.7M
36.4M
23.9M
***612
0.5M
1.0M
4.9M
1.9M
2.1M
2.4M
2.1M
-
6.3M**
0.09M 0.05M 0.09M 0.02M 0.02M 0.02M - 0.05M
- 0.34M 0.25M 0.08M 0.05M 0.10M - -
- 0.35M 0.30M 0.20M 0.04M 0.11M 2.94M -
0.19M 0.08M 0.09M 0.07M 0.03M 0.01M 0.17M 0.88M
- 0.08M 0.05M 0.05M 0.01M 0.03M - 0.74M
0.49M 0.25M 0.10M 0.11M 0.03M 0.02M 0.34M -
- 0.30M 0.16M 0.13M 0.04M 0.10M 0.30M 0.27M
- 0.35M - 0.16M - - - -
0.50M 0.35M 0.30M 0.21M 0.05M 0.11M 2.94 1.31M
0.3M
0.8M
3.9M
1.5M
1.0M
1.3M
1.3M
0.5M
4.5M**
EiE
ES-NFI
Food Security
Health
Nutrition
Protection
WASH
MP Cash
TOTAL
Access to
basic
services
Refugee
chapter
Total
(US$)
% children,
women,
men*
TOTAL CONFLICT POPULATION MOVEMENT DISASTERS ACCESS SEX & AGE REQUIREMENTS
People
to be
assisted
People in need Conflictaffected
Conflictdisplaced
Natural
disasterdisplaced
Afghan
returnees
Pakistani
refugees
Suddenonset
Slowonset
PEOPLE IN NEED, PEOPLE TO RECEIVE ASSISTANCE AND FINANCIAL REQUIREMENTS FOR 2019
31 #
PART I: Summar y of needs , targets & re quire ments
PART II: OPERATIONAL
RESPONSE PLANS
Education in emergencies
Emergency shelter & non-food items
Food security & agriculture
Health
Nutrition
Protection
Water, sanitation & hygiene
Multi-purpose cash assistance
Refugee chapter
PART II: Educati on in Emergencies
32
2019 PEOPLE IN NEED EDUCATION IN EMERGENCIES
0.5M
REQUIREMENTS (US$)
33.8M
PEOPLE TO BE ASSISTED
0.3M
The Education in Emergencies (EiE) response
plan aims to provide safe, equitable, relevant
and age-appropriate education opportunities
for crisis-affected girls and boys in
Afghanistan. Accessing education during
emergencies is not only a child’s right, but
also a potentially life-saving turning point.
EiE support is physically and psychosocially
protective and tries to take children out of
the immediate crisis situation where they are
deeply vulnerable to abuses and exploitation,
and place them in an environment where
their social, emotional, cognitive and
developmental needs are addressed. EiE
activities emphasise traditional subjects,
including mathematics, science and language,
as well as life-skills and life-saving messages.
Multi-year strategy
The chosen strategies for bringing targeted
school-age children back to education
include: providing temporary learning spaces
(TLSs), whenever possible set-up within a
formal school; offering community-based
education (CBE) or accelerated learning
classes (ALC); offering catch-up classes; and
early multi-grade teaching (Years 1-6) in
the community itself, protecting younger
children from having to travel to the nearest
school until they are old enough to transition
to formal schools. Due to a shortage of funds,
the provision of TLSs in formal schools has
only been possible by double-, or sometimes
triple-shift67 teaching which is not ideal but is
designed to minimise risks to the quality of
education provided.
These modalities are all supported by the
sector’s agreed minimum standard teaching
and learning materials in the form of
classroom, teacher and individual student
kits. Activities are intended to include full
packages consisting of: TLS, CBE, teacher
recruitment and training, psychosocial
support, and the provision of teaching and
learning materials. All children receive
parts of the package based on their actual
needs, with responses specially tailored
to IDPs, returnees and vulnerable hostcommunity
children, who may have different
requirements including life-skills training for
adolescents focusing on social-cohesion.
The activities are aimed at ensuring the
eventual transition of affected children into
the formal system. The intention is for the
Ministry of Education to lead this process
and absorb students into its formal schools.
The same activities the were implemented in
2018 will continue in 2019-2021, but these
will be scaled-up in light of the upcoming
presidential elections and the anticipated
interruptions to education these could bring.
Response approach
For 2019, EiE partners will target almost
350,000 IDP, returnee and vulnerable host
community children with critical and acute
humanitarian needs.68 In line with the
principles of the Afghanistan HRP 2018-
2021, the EiEWG does not list all children
0.13M 0.07M 0.13M 0.03M 0.02M 0.03M - 0.08M
0.09M 0.05M 0.09M 0.02M 0.02M 0.02M - 0.05M
100 | 0 | 0%
100 | 0 | 0%
PEOPLE IN
NEED
PEOPLE TO
BE ASSISTED
FINANCIAL
REQUIREMENTS
Access to
basic
services
% children,
women,
men*
CONFLICT POPULATION MOVEMENT NATURAL DISASTERS ACCESS BY SEX & AGE
Conflictaffected
Conflictdisplaced
Suddenonset
Slowonset
Natural
disasterdisplaced
Afghan
returnees
Pakistani
Refugees
*Children (<18
years old), men,
women (adult
>18 years old)
SECTOR: $33.4M REFUGEE CHAPTER: $0.4M TOTAL: $33.8M
CONTACTS
Romal Abdullah
Cluster Coordinator
afg.edu@
humanitarianresponse.info
Benafsha Noory
Information Management
Officer
afg.edu.im@
humanitarianresponse.info
BREAKDOWN OF PEOPLE IN NEED AND PEOPLE TO BE ASSISTED BY VULNERABLE GROUP, SEX AND AGE
PART II: Educati on in Emergencies
33 #
who are out-of-school as PiN but instead focuses on the
most vulnerable boys and girls who are out-of-school due to
sudden shocks. EiE partners will target school-aged children
in provinces where there are large concentrations of IDPs and
returnees who are most affected by the ongoing conflict and
drought: Badghis, Baghlan, Balkh, Faryab, Hilmand, Hirat,
Kabul, Kandahar, Kunduz, Nangarhar, Takhar and Uruzgan.
Looking forward, the Afghanistan EiE target for 2020 is
estimated to be just over 300,000 people, while the target
for 2021 is estimated to be almost the same. These forecasts
represent 73 per cent of the 2019 PiN figure. The EiE working
group (EiEWG) has based its forward projections on recent
conflict trends, where a decrease in displacement has been
noted in 2018, even though the number of children out-ofschool
continues to remain high in conflict-affected or natural
disaster areas. The calculation also anticipates that the impact
of the drought will not go beyond 2019; and that the number
of returnees from Pakistan will remain relatively modest.
The PiN figure will have to be re-calculated based on the
environment in 2020 and 2021.
The displacement situation is dynamic with comprehensive
data on the number of affected children changes rapidly,
especially in drought-affected provinces where families
are continuously moving. EiE studies69 consistently show
displaced children are likely to miss-out on education and
are subject to increased protection risks in their areas of
displacement. Thus, the goal is to offer returnees, IDPs and the
most vulnerable families access to education, with a reduced
financial burden, so as to limit the number of families using
negative coping mechanisms.
Inter-sector programming
The EiEWG has been working closely with the UNICEF/
UNAMA Monitoring and Reporting Mechanism (MRM)
team and the Child Protection in Emergencies (CPiE) subcluster
to ensure that protection issues are addressed in a
conflict-sensitive manner in the humanitarian response, and
that mitigation measures are applied during implementation
and monitoring of the programme. As an inter-sectoral
component, 2019 activities will be integrated with child
protection actions to minimise the risk of families resorting to
child marriage, child labour, exploitation and harm. A WASH
component will also focus on improved hygiene practices
in learning spaces through the training of teachers and
community representatives.
Efficiencies & effectiveness of multi-year
programming
In support of the HRP objectives for 2019, the EiE working
group will strengthen its support to the response through
the production of quality information management products
which are widely shared with donors and others for advocacy
and awareness; strong data analysis; assessment result
compilation and interpretation; capacity-building of partners
(including government counterparts) in planning, response,
monitoring and reporting; and improved identification of
and coordinated response to gaps. Sub-national coordination
in Hirat, Kabul, Kandahar, and Nangarhar will be a special
focus during the coming years with the aim of improving
monitoring and reporting, as well as promoting informed and
active participation of implementing partners, provincial and
district-level education department officials (PED/DEDs),
donors and OCHA, to ensure the most vulnerable children are
reached, duplication is avoided, and inter-sectoral linkages on
the ground are strengthened.
Links to development programming
Decades of conflict have had a devastating impact on
Afghanistan’s society, undermining access to and the quality
of basic services such as primary schooling. The long-standing
education deficit due to poverty and underdevelopment
cannot be overcome through humanitarian action alone,
despite the legitimate education needs among 3.7 million
Inputs provided by the Education in Emergencies working group. For detailed response strategies and specific cluster objectives and indicators see the sector
page on humanitarianresponse.info
PEOPLE IN NEED, PEOPLE TO RECEIVE ASSISTANCE,
FINANCIAL REQUIREMENTS & CASH ASSISTANCE (2019-21)
2019 2020 2021
People in need 0.49M 0.35M 0.34M
People to be assisted 0.35M 0.3M 0.3M
Requirements (US$) 33.8M 24.9M 24.9M
Target share of
assistance in cash (%) 0% 0% 0%
Assistance to be
provided in cash (US$) - - -
PART II: Educati on in Emergencies
34
children who are currently out-of-school in Afghanistan.
Through humanitarian assistance, EiE partners are prioritising
their response to meet the immediate education needs of outof-
school children who are affected by conflict and disaster,
especially those who are displaced. It is of utmost importance
that the gains that have been made in education in the last
two decades are not lost either due to the ongoing conflict
or the extreme overcrowding presently being witnessed in
many primary schools as a result of accommodating large
numbers of IDP and returnee students. These risks threaten
to undermine the already fragile state of Afghanistan’s formal
education system.
Education is, by its very nature, at the nexus of the
humanitarian and development fields. National EiEWG
meetings are also attended by development donor
representatives, and dialogue with development donors
such as the World Bank (the managing entity of the
Education Quality Reform in Afghanistan or EQRA) will
be strengthened during the coming year to ensure EiE
and development education responses continue to be fully
aligned for the sake of the many children currently deprived
of their right to education because of acute humanitarian
needs or chronic problems. Activities are also in line with the
‘Education Cannot Wait’ Multi-Year Resilience Programme,
that will be launched in 2019.
EiE activities will improve access to quality education
through community-based and innovative approaches with
the support of key stakeholders in the field, including local
authorities. The EiE working group at national and subnational
levels will oversee work related to developing and
scaling-up the programme, including linkages between
humanitarian and development needs, as well as coordination
with various stakeholders in the education sector in the
country e.g the Development Partners Group (DPG) etc.
to document lessons-learned from work completed and to
identify opportunities for expansion of successful strategies in
future planning by the Ministry of Education.
COST COMPARISION PER PERSON ASSISTED 2018-21 (US$)
2018 2019 2020 2021
85 95 83 85
The cost of providing emergency education per child is approximately $95 in 2019,
up from $85 last year. The increase in the cost per child in 2019 is due to higher
operational costs in hard-to-reach areas; an improved EiE integrated approach
with child protection partners, improved monitoring mechanisms and increased
reporting requirements under the ‘Education Under Attack’ initiative and the
provision of additional life-skills activities for youth and adolescents. 2020 and
2021 costs have been estimated based on projected targets and requirements.
PART II: Emergenc y Shelter & Non -Food Ite ms
35 #
EMERGENCY SHELTER
& NON-FOOD ITEMS
REQUIREMENTS (US$)
48.3M
PEOPLE TO BE ASSISTED
0.8M
The aim of the Emergency Shelter and Non-
Food Items (ES-NFI) cluster is to provide
life-saving assistance to people affected
by conflict and natural disaster, including
the current drought-displaced population,
by protecting them from the elements,
mitigating protection risks and ensuring
people’s dignity and safety. Priority target
populations include: IDPs, returnees and
vulnerable host communities. The response
will be tailored through a multi-sectoral,
integrated approach in coordination with
the Government, development actors and
through engagement with communities.
Multi-year strategy
In 2019, the cluster will prioritise:
1. Vulnerable families who have been directly
impacted by new emergencies including
returnees, those at risk of eviction and
those living in open spaces in both
accessible and hard-to-reach areas by
providing emergency shelter and NFI
assistance that ensures their privacy and
dignity, while mitigating protection and
health risks.
2. The improvement of existing shelters
that are in poor condition particularly
for prolonged IDPs, returnees and newly
displaced families. Vulnerable, prolonged
IDPs and returnees with secured tenure
will receive short to medium-term
support for transitional shelters in the
form of construction or rental assistance
to improve their privacy,
psychological well-being, safety and
security until a durable solution is found.
3. For the winterisation response, the cluster
will focus on resilience-building through
support such as the provision of solarised
verandas to minimise the cost for heating
during winter.
4. In response to the drought displacement,
the cluster will support site management.
Looking forward to 2020 and 2021, the
cluster will continue similar life-saving
activities (emergency shelter, provision of
NFI and shelter upgrades) due to anticipated
ongoing conflict and disaster, as well as
returns from Iran and Pakistan. Newly
vulnerable families displaced and affected
by conflict and natural disaster, as well as
returnees have limited capacity to cope
with the onset of winter and will continue
to require initial assistance to survive and
thereby mitigate negative coping mechanisms
related to early marriage, child labour and
other protection risks. Vulnerable returnee
families and those exposed to prolonged
displacement – either due to conflict, drought
or other disasters – will require interim
shelter solutions.
Response approach
For the response, the cluster will prioritise the
regions with the highest shelter, winterisation
and NFI needs: the western, eastern,
- 0.40M 0.30M 0.12M 0.05M 0.12M - -
- 0.34M 0.25M 0.08M 0.05M 0.10M - -
60 | 20 | 20%
60 | 20 | 20%
PEOPLE IN
NEED
PEOPLE TO
BE ASSISTED
FINANCIAL
REQUIREMENTS
Access to
basic
services
% children,
women,
men*
CONFLICT POPULATION MOVEMENT NATURAL DISASTERS ACCESS BY SEX & AGE
Conflictaffected
Conflictdisplaced
Suddenonset
Slowonset
Natural
disasterdisplaced
Afghan
returnees
Pakistani
Refugees
*Children (<18
years old), men,
women (adult
>18 years old)
SECTOR: $44.2M REFUGEE CHAPTER: $4.1M TOTAL: $48.3M
CONTACTS
Irene Mutevu
Cluster Coordinator
mutevu@unhcr.org
Ahmadi Gul
Mohammad
Co-chair
gahmadi@iom.int
BREAKDOWN OF PEOPLE IN NEED AND PEOPLE TO BE ASSISTED BY VULNERABLE GROUP, SEX AND AGE
2019 PEOPLE IN NEED
1M
PART II: Emergenc y Shelter & Non -Food Ite ms
36
northern and southern regions. All those displaced by drought
and living in the open without NFI will be targeted in 2019,
complemented by site management activities. The priorities of
the cluster are geared towards achieving protection outcomes
through the integration of cross-cutting issues related to
housing, land and property, protection, gender, age, disability
and AAP. The cluster will prioritise the collection and analysis
of sex and age disaggregated data to inform its response in
addressing the different needs of boys, girls, women and men,
as well as vulnerable groups including people with a disability,
female-headed households and older people.
For 2019, the cluster will aim to assist 820,000 of the most
vulnerable people in need. This will include emergency
shelter and NFI assistance and a winterisation response. It
also incorporates site management and physical site planning
activities for drought-displacement in the Badghis and Hirat
sites in the first half of the year. For 2020 and 2021, the cluster
will cover just over 460,000 people who are classified as the
most vulnerable families, focusing on life-saving activities.
For 2020 and 2021, it is not expected that site management
activities will be needed for drought IDPs as this is just
an interim measure to facilitate and enable predictable
humanitarian assistance, however transitional shelter
support may still be required. The cluster will also increase its
advocacy with the Government and development actors for
a sustainable response through opportunities for livelihoods,
income generation and durable housing.
Considering the development of a National Housing Policy,
the cluster’s transitional shelter design is expected to be
reviewed further in coordination with the Government, to
obtain a more focused and mainstreamed approach among
partners and strengthen synergies with development partners.
Partners are expected to comply with the agreed technical
guidelines and minimum standards in all ES-NFI cluster
response activities.
The cluster uses both in-kind and cash modalities in its
humanitarian response. The decision regarding which
modality is chosen is based on market assessments,
accessibility and availability of the commodities, as well as its
capacity to meet the needs of the people. Cash will be used
when considered the best option as it puts the onus on and
empowers the people targeted, at the same time as giving
flexibility in meeting their immediate needs and mitigating
vulnerabilities. ES-NFI assistance (cash/in-kind) will be
provided to affected people after identifying needs accurately
and in line with the cluster’s minimum standard. Efforts will
be made to ensure the same level of assistance is provided
based on needs by adjusting distributions to agreed standard
packages.
Whether the response is in-kind or cash, the cluster
recommends an integrated, multi-sector approach be adopted
to prevent cash being used to meet needs outside of shelter
and to ensure that families are adequately protected from
the elements. Post-distribution monitoring has shown that
due to the extent of other needs, targeted families often do
not prioritise shelter and opt for very low-cost, sub-standard
shelter, while continuing to live in overcrowded conditions.
This situation often exposes vulnerable families, including
those headed by single women, to protection risks and
frequently does not allow separate spaces for women and girls.
Needs assessments, analysis and response will consider the
collection of SADD and the various needs of girls, boys,
women and men. Partners will ensure that assessment teams
include women to enable adequate collection of information
about the different issues that create barriers for women and
girls in accessing ES-NFI cluster assistance.
Inter-sector programming
The cluster will promote joint programming, assessments
and an integrated, multi-sectoral response. In particular,
ES-NFI activities, assessments, analysis and distributions
will be done jointly with other clusters, where feasible, in
order to guarantee cost and time-efficiency by using crosssectoral
vulnerability criteria to help promote joint responses.
PEOPLE IN NEED, PEOPLE TO RECEIVE ASSISTANCE,
FINANCIAL REQUIREMENTS & CASH ASSISTANCE (2019-21)
2019 2020 2021
People in need 0.99M 0.59M 0.56M
People to be assisted 0.82M 0.46M 0.46M
Requirements (US$) 48.3M 41.7M 39.5M
Target share of
assistance in cash (%) 88% 88% 88%
Assistance to be
provided in cash (US$) 42.5M 36.7M 34.7M
Inputs provided by the ES-NFI cluster. For detailed response strategies and specific cluster objectives and indicators see the cluster page on
humanitarianresponse.info
PART II: Emergenc y Shelter & Non -Food Ite ms
37 #
The FSAC and/or the WASH cluster present a number of
opportunities in this regard. Information-sharing within
the cluster and with other clusters is vital to mitigating
duplication and maximising the use of resources. The WASH
cluster will complement NFI packages with hygiene kits and
provide latrines to support emergency and transitional shelter
assistance.
Efficiencies & effectiveness of multi-year
programming
Within the multi-year HRP strategy, the cluster will continue
to provide life-saving assistance to newly-displaced people
affected by conflict and natural disaster, as well as returnees.
The cluster will continue to assist the most vulnerable families
with one-off winterisation assistance and at the same time,
build community resilience through alternative solutions
such as passive, solarised verandas, where appropriate, to
minimise the cost of heating and mitigate negative coping
mechanisms. Moreover, the cluster will advocate for
livelihoods opportunities, while supporting medium-term
shelter solutions for the most vulnerable families, to mitigate
the risk of eviction and foster peaceful co-existence with host
communities. The challenges faced include limited job and
livelihoods options to address medium- or longer-term shelter
needs.
The number of local NGO partners participating in the
cluster increased from 5 in 2017 to 13 in 2018 through subcontracting
arrangements with INGOs and UN agencies
or direct engagement using support from the Afghanistan
Humanitarian Fund and bilateral donors. This approach will
continue to enhance the capacity of national partners and
promote localisation. A gradual exit strategy will be initiated
in 2019 with two Ministries: Afghanistan National Disaster
Management Agency (ANDMA) and Ministry of Refugees
and Repatriations (MoRR). This will include capacity-building
through formal and on-site trainings, higher government
involvement in cluster coordination functions through a
coordinated shelter response and material support.
Links to development programming
The cluster will continue to advocate with the Government
and development actors, including UN Habitat, for more
sustainable shelter solutions for IDPs, returnees and those
affected by conflict or natural disasters. This includes
empowering communities through resilience-building
projects such as the CCNPP, and creating jobs and livelihoods
opportunities. In addition, the land decree is one of the
most vital processes to enabling a low-cost, durable housing
solution. With the development of the National Housing
Policy, it is hoped that vulnerable families will have greater
access to adequate housing, complemented by other basic
services, in line with the land allocation scheme.
COST COMPARISION PER PERSON ASSISTED 2018-21 (US$)
2018 2019 2020 2021
78 58 90 86
The cost per beneficiary for 2019 is $58 as compared to $78 in 2018. This reduced
cost is due to an increase in the use of cash modalities for rental assistance versus
in-kind emergency shelter (tent + two tarps) in 2019 and the lower number of
families targeted for transitional shelter assistance in 2019 (from 6,370 families in
2018 to 3,000 families in 2019). The average cost for transitional shelter per family
is $1,625 as compared to $455 for emergency shelter assistance. 2020 and 2021
costs have been estimated based on projected targets and requirements.
PART II: Food Securit y & Agriculture
38
FOOD SECURITY & AGRICULTURE
REQUIREMENTS (US$)
278.8M
PEOPLE TO BE ASSISTED
3.9M
The objective of the FSAC is to improve
the food security situation for disaster
and conflict-affected, vulnerable people
by providing access to nutritious food and
protecting their livelihoods. Through regular
assessments and gap analyses, FSAC leads an
evidence-based, integrated response to assist
those who are most vulnerable, especially
women, children and people with disabilities.
FSAC will continue to provide early warning
information on food security to support the
humanitarian community in developing
contingency plans for a timely response to
emerging needs. To ensure access to hard-toreach
areas, FSAC will provide trainings on
assessments and response to local partners,
engaging them in cluster activities.
Multi-year strategy
Humanitarian needs are widespread across
the country. Almost 40 per cent of people in
Afghanistan are experiencing either Crisis
or Emergency levels of food insecurity
according to the IPC system. FSAC’s response
will focus on immediate food assistance to
avoid hunger, malnutrition and migration.
A standard food basket has been designed
to provide 2,100 Kcal per person per day
for a family of 7 people. A similar cash
amount of $90 per month has also been set
to match the cost of the agreed food basket
in the local market. The FSAC response will
favour cash where markets are functional
and where transparent, secure cash transfer
mechanisms are available. FSAC will also
focus on protecting vulnerable agriculturebased
livelihoods by providing access to
basic farming inputs, animal feed, animal
vaccination, de-worming, small kitchen
gardens and poultry farming to ensure food
and nutrition security at the householdlevel.
Food and agriculture-based livelihoods
activities will help to ensure access to
nutritious food.
Response approach
Recognising that overall food security and
livelihoods needs are much higher, FSAC has
focused on those who are acutely in need by
using strict vulnerability criteria. Vulnerable
groups such as drought, conflict, and crossborder
movement-affected communities
are prioritised for the response. FSAC will
coordinate its response with the WASH and
Nutrition clusters to ensure the most urgent
needs are met.
In 2019, FSAC partners will target just over
3.9 million people with food assistance and
1.8 million with livelihoods assistance, out of
a total of 4.9 million people in need. People
to be assisted have been identified based on
findings from the recent EFSA, in the case
of the drought and following findings from
the WoA Assessment and FSAC-specific
surveys for IDPs and returnees. Overall, 75
per cent of new conflict IDPs and 80 per
cent of the returnees will be targeted for
food assistance. The response to conflict and
cross-border movements will be provided in
- 0.35M 0.30M 0.20M 0.04M 0.11M 3.90M -
- 0.35M 0.30M 0.20M 0.04M 0.11M 2.94M -
59 | 20 | 21%
59 | 20 | 21%
PEOPLE IN
NEED
PEOPLE TO
BE ASSISTED
FINANCIAL
REQUIREMENTS
Access to
basic
services
% children,
women,
men*
CONFLICT POPULATION MOVEMENT NATURAL DISASTERS ACCESS BY SEX & AGE
Conflict- -
affected
Conflictdisplaced
Suddenonset
Slowonset
Natural
disasterdisplaced
Afghan
returnees
Pakistani
Refugees
*Children (<18
years old), men,
women (adult
>18 years old)
SECTOR: $278.9M REFUGEE CHAPTER: - TOTAL: $278.9M
CONTACTS
Abdul Majid
Cluster Coordinator
abdul.majid@fao.org
Eric Kenefick
Co-lead
eric.kenefick@wfp.org
BREAKDOWN OF PEOPLE IN NEED AND PEOPLE TO BE ASSISTED BY VULNERABLE GROUP, SEX AND AGE
2019 PEOPLE IN NEED
4.9M
PART II: Food Securit y & Agriculture
39 #
close coordination with OCHA, IOM and UNHCR and will
be focused on reaching the most vulnerable people.
For 2019, FSAC is targeting 3.9 million people for food and
livelihood assistance. To reach this target, FSAC is appealing
for $279 million ($240 million for food and $39 million
for livelihoods) as its funding requirement. The funding
requirement and number of people in need show a decreasing
trend over the next three years, and this assumes that the
current drought impact will decrease over time because of
targeted assistance being provided and improved weather
conditions, especially precipitation over the course of the next
three years.
FSAC partners are increasingly using cluster vulnerability
criteria to select people for assistance and avoid status-based
assistance. The cluster will work with partners on further
strengthening these needs-based tools, reflecting recent
findings from the EFSA, in order to reach the most vulnerable
as part of the response strategy for 2019. Recently-displaced
people (within a six month period); people living in informal
settlements without social support; large families with low
incomes or reliant on volatile daily wages; those with a lack
of productive assets; those with a high number of dependent
children; those affected by major deficits in crop and livestock
production; families with disabled heads-of-household,
women-headed households, and families resorting to high
food-based coping strategies such as limiting food portions
and skipping meals, will be some of the criteria used to select
people for assistance. Agriculture and livestock support will be
provided only to subsistence farmers who are unable to afford
to purchase it.
The FSAC priority is to use cash for the response, where
appropriate. Currently, most of the response is provided
though in-kind assistance. FSAC partners provide a
combination of cash, in-kind and a mixed approach, as
needed. To promote cash assistance as a modality for the
response, FSAC is increasingly involved in market assessments
and developing guidelines on cash responses for food and
livelihoods packages. FSAC is also working closely with the
CVWG to harmonise assessment and monitoring tools to
support partners in conducting better response analysis. For
the multi-year response strategy, FSAC established targets
for the proportion of the response being delivered via cash
modalities to push partners towards using cash where markets
are functional, and where quality food and livelihoods
packages, as well as transparent cash transfer mechanisms are
available.
FSAC partners will continue to use the in-kind modality in
rural areas, especially those where agriculture and livestock
production remain significantly lower and where access to
functional markets is challenging. FSAC partners, especially
cluster lead agencies, are increasingly working with food
producers to ensure quality nutritious food and livelihoods
inputs are available in the local markets.
Inter-sector programming
The FSAC recognises the importance of an integrated, multisector
approach to supporting affected populations. FSAC will
focus on adopting an integrated response approach in 2019
and beyond. The cluster will work closely with the Nutrition,
WASH and Health clusters to prevent malnutrition. Fullyaligned
water, hygiene and nutrition support is necessary to
achieve food security objectives. Most of the drought-affected
areas have significant water and hygiene deficits and are
lacking in health and nutrition services, so there is a clear
need to design joint responses. FSAC is taking the lead in
identifying the target locations where multiple needs exist
through the EFSA.
Malnourished women and children identified by nutrition
partners will receive food and agriculture assistance, including
livestock support and kitchen garden activities. Additionally,
FSAC will also link its activities with the WASH cluster
through cash-for-work and asset-creation projects related to
water, sanitation, and hygiene. By working closely with the
Protection cluster, FSAC will strive to mainstream protection
in all its activities. FSAC is committed to contributing to a
standard integrated programming response package to avoid
hunger and malnutrition. Currently, the ICCT is exploring
PEOPLE IN NEED, PEOPLE TO RECEIVE ASSISTANCE,
FINANCIAL REQUIREMENTS & CASH ASSISTANCE (2019-21)
2019 2020 2021
People in need 4.90M 2.63M 1.63M
People to be assisted 3.94M 2.14M 1.38M
Requirements (US$) 278.8M 161.8M 104.1M
Target share of
assistance in cash (%) 23% 31% 36%
Assistance to be
provided in cash (US$) 64.1M 50.1M 37.5M
Inputs provided by FSAC. For detailed response strategies and specific cluster objectives and indicators see the cluster page on humanitarianresponse.info
PART II: Food Securit y & Agriculture
40
options to pilot an integrated response programme in four
drought-affected districts of Badghis province to demonstrate
the higher impact of joint programming.
Efficiencies & effectiveness of multi-year
programming
FSAC responses are more efficient and effective as a result of
multi-year response planning, as most food security activities
are seasonal, with spill-overs from one year to another. In
2018, FSAC faced serious challenges in the continuity of the
response and compliance with reporting mechanisms, as most
food responses were targeting assistance through peak hunger
seasons which start from October and continue until the end
of March the next year, while the winter cultivation season
starts from November and continues until mid-February of
the following year Response planning and funding can now be
better managed through the multi-year response plan.
Links to development programming
Food insecurity and poverty are on the rise in Afghanistan70
because of continued conflict, climate change, cross-border
movement and structural causes of food insecurity and
poverty. Increases in both acute and chronic needs make
collaboration between humanitarian and development actors
inevitable. Based on the 2018 IPC analysis for November
2018-February 2019,71 9.9 million people are currently
estimated to be in IPC phase 3 (Crisis); this is a 9 per cent
increase in the number of people who were classified as
being in IPC phase 3 last year (2017). In addition, a further
3.6 million people are now estimated to be in IPC phase 4
(emergency).
Development partners and the Government need to scaleup
programmes, such as construction of irrigation channels,
water reservoirs, Karez (underground irrigation), training
of farmers though farmer field schools, natural resource
management, pasture land management, and veterinary
services. This work is especially urgent in vulnerable provinces
with chronic food insecurity such as Badakhshan, Badghis,
Daykundi, Farah, Faryab, Ghor Hilmand, Jawzjan, Kandahar,
Nuristan and Uruzgan. FSAC will continue to advocate for
these communities and guide its partners’ efforts to link
humanitarian activities with longer-term development
programming for sustainable food security outcomes.
FSAC will work closely with the Government (MAIL, the
Department of Agriculture Irrigation and Livestock - DAIL
and the Ministry of Rural Rehabilitation and Development
- MRRD) and other development actors (e.g the World
Bank, European Union, USAID) to coordinate its livelihoods
programme.
COST COMPARISION PER PERSON ASSISTED 2018-21 (US$)
2018 2019 2020 2021
60 72 76 75
The overall cost per person assisted has increased from $60 per person to $72 per
person in 2019. This change is due to the multiple packages of assistance received
as part of the drought response where, in most cases, the same beneficiaries are
provided with food and agriculture or livestock assistance to avoid asset depletion,
hunger and malnutrition. The cost of food assistance per person assisted per month,
including support costs, remains at $20 and the cost of the livelihoods package
per person remained $21, the same as last year. 2020 and 2021 costs have been
estimated based on projected targets and requirements.
PART II: Health
41 #
HEALTH
REQUIREMENTS (US$)
51.4M
PEOPLE TO BE ASSISTED
1.5M
The aim of the Health cluster is to respond
in a timely manner to immediate health
needs in Afghanistan by ensuring access to
critical and life-saving health services for
acutely vulnerable people, particularly the
provision of trauma care, rehabilitation and
psychosocial support. The Health cluster also
aims to strengthen health preparedness and
resilience of the health system by focusing
on disease surveillance and response to
public health outbreaks, while reinforcing
institutional and individual capacity to
respond to disasters.
Multi-year strategy
In 2019, the Health cluster will achieve its
aims through four priority actions:
1. Ensuring 1.5 million vulnerable people in
Afghanistan affected by conflict, natural
disaster and population movement in
districts are reached with quality, essential
and life-saving healthcare services,
including maternal and child health,
reproductive health, mental health and
psychosocial support, health services for
the elderly and rehabilitation for people
with disabilities. The Health cluster will
work within the current health system to
reach acceptable access to basic services for
the population.
2. Ensuring that people affected by conflict
receives life-saving trauma care in the 121
districts where there currently isn’t any
capacity to respond. The Health cluster will
aim to increase coverage and capacity for
trauma care under the multi-year HRP to
improve survival rates for victims of the
conflict.
3. Responding to health emergencies and
outbreaks through improved emergency
preparedness, response and coordination
by pre-positioning essential medicines and
supplies, disease surveillance and assistance
in conflict and disaster-prone areas that
have limited capacity to respond.
4. Responding to immediate health needs
in areas where health facilities have either
been forcibly closed or damaged as a result
of the conflict, through mobile services and
provision of emergency medical supplies,
as well as advocating with relevant parties
on health violations of IHL.
Response approach
Geographically, the cluster will primarily
focus in the southern and eastern regions,
with some additional programming in the
west and north in response to the drought.
The Health cluster’s response prioritisation
is guided by the ISSS under the thematic
area ‘Protection of Civilians and Armed
Conflict’. The focus is on the two areas with
the highest incidence of armed conflict,
primarily Hilmand, Kandahar, Uruzgan and
Zabul in the southern region, and Nangarhar
and surrounding provinces in the east.
Under the ‘Population Movement and Forced
Displacement’ thematic area, provinces with
0.25M 0.10M 0.09M 0.08M 0.03M 0.01M 0.17M 1.17M
0.19M 0.08M 0.09M 0.07M 0.03M 0.01M 0.17M 0.88M
59 | 20 | 21%
59 | 20 | 21%
PEOPLE IN
NEED
PEOPLE TO
BE ASSISTED
FINANCIAL
REQUIREMENTS
Access to
basic
services
% children,
women,
men*
CONFLICT POPULATION MOVEMENT NATURAL DISASTERS ACCESS BY SEX & AGE
Conflictaffected
Conflictdisplaced
Suddenonset
Slowonset
Natural
disasterdisplaced
Afghan
returnees
Pakistani
Refugees
*Children (<18
years old), men,
women (adult
>18 years old)
SECTOR: $51.4M REFUGEE CHAPTER: - TOTAL: $51.4M
CONTACTS
David Lai
Cluster Coordinator
laidavid@who.int
Wael Eskander
Information
Management Officer
weskander@immap.org
BREAKDOWN OF PEOPLE IN NEED AND PEOPLE TO BE ASSISTED BY VULNERABLE GROUP, SEX AND AGE
2019 PEOPLE IN NEED
1.9M
PART II: Health
42
the highest number of cross-border returns will be targeted: in
order, Hirat, Nangarhar and Kandahar. Returnees from Iran
have a very high burden of disease and often report multiple
health issues upon their return to Afghanistan. These include
trauma injuries, physical disabilities, mental health issues,
drug addiction, communicable and non-communicable
diseases. Finally, in 2019 the Health cluster will continue
to respond to drought-affected people in the displacement
sites, as well as areas of origin, primarily in the western and
northern regions.
In 2020 and 2021, the number of conflict-affected people
being targeted is expected to increase, given that the nature
and severity of conflict-related injuries is deteriorating. The
Health cluster also plans to increase coverage to address this
need for expanded trauma care. Services for rehabilitation,
mental health and psychosocial support will also need to
increase given that trauma-related mortality is decreasing,
while trauma-related morbidity and disability are rapidly
increasing. Activities under the Health cluster for 2020
and 2021 will have the same focus and will aim to improve
accessibility of essential health services to shock-affected
people.
The Health cluster partners’ response will include direct
implementation services and in-kind support to people
affected by conflict, forced displacement and natural
disasters in order to increase access to essential life-saving
health assistance. Through the provision of assistance
by humanitarian actors and additional human resources
to complement and support the health system during
emergencies, partners will contribute to ensuring service
continuity, reducing deaths and illness among shock-affected
people. Other in-kind support will include materials such as
medicines, medical supplies/equipment, and non-medical
equipment. In addition, the Health cluster will provide
technical and resource support to strengthen the disease
surveillance system. The Health cluster prefers to operate
through fixed health facilities but will deploy mobile health
teams (MHTs) as necessary. However, the Health cluster
does recognise that a lack of medicine in health facilities is
a frequent occurrence within the fragile health system in
Afghanistan and patients will often require cash to purchase
life-saving medicine. Market-based (cash) response options
for health require further discussion and exploration before
implementation. It is not expected that any significant share
of beneficiaries will be assisted through cash in 2019-2021.
The primary obstacle that remains to be addressed is the
significant lack of accessible health services.
Inter-sector programming
The Health cluster will integrate its programmes with other
clusters at various levels and scales. In particular, the Health
cluster will work with the Nutrition cluster to focus on shared
resources and implementation modalities, while focusing on
the medical treatment of SAM through therapeutic feeding
units. In addition, the Health cluster collaborates with the
Protection cluster to ensure the effective implementation of
projects with activities spanning both sectors, addressing
both mental health and psychosocial support, as well as
responses to GBV. Gender will be mainstreamed to ensure
that clinical management of GBV is improved. The cluster will
work together with Protection colleagues and EiE partners
to promote the protection of patients, health staff and health
facilities in accordance with IHL. This will be achieved
by developing improved monitoring tools and promoting
joint advocacy initiatives. In collaboration with the WASH
cluster, the Health cluster will ensure a WASH component
in the assessment and rehabilitation of health facilities. The
Health cluster will also engage with the WASH cluster to
address water-borne disease outbreaks and joint information,
education and communication activities related to hygiene
behaviours.
Efficiencies & effectiveness of multi-year
programming
The Health cluster’s strategy is aligned with the Ministry of
Public Health (MoPH) National Health Strategy 2016-2020.
Together with the MoPH and in coordination with Basic
Package Health Services (BPHS) implementers, the Health
cluster strategy will take advantage of the multi-year approach
through direct service provision, as well as strengthening of
national institutional partners. Contributing to long-term
sustainability of the health system, the multi-year response
PEOPLE IN NEED, PEOPLE TO RECEIVE ASSISTANCE,
FINANCIAL REQUIREMENTS & CASH ASSISTANCE (2019-21)
2019 2020 2021
People in need 1.90M 1.84M 1.75M
People to be assisted 1.51M 1.84M 1.75M
Requirements (US$) 51.4M 58.5M 54.4M
Target share of
assistance in cash (%) 0% 0% 0%
Assistance to be
provided in cash
(US$)
0 0 0
PART II: Health
43 #
will target key drivers of vulnerability. This will include
enhancing the capacity of health workers, establishing
sustainable supplies of life-saving health resources and
improving the resilience of health facilities and communities.
Within the multi-year response, the Health cluster will aim to
strengthen the capacity of national institutional partners and
the MoPH to meet the critical and urgent health needs of the
population.
Links to development programming
In addition, the Health cluster contributes to the One-
UN framework under the thematic groups of ‘Health’ and
‘Return and Reintegration’. The Health cluster will strengthen
links with development partners within this multi-year
response by enhancing the capacity of health workers to
respond in an emergency, establishing a sustainable supply
of life-saving health resources and improving resilience
of health facilities and communities. The Health cluster
recognises the underlying driver of chronic needs remains
the underdevelopment of a sustainable health system within
Afghanistan.
The Health cluster will continue to advocate for durable
solutions, increased capacity of health actors to respond to
health emergencies through surveillance and monitoring
systems, and increased rapid response capacity to
reduce the underlying vulnerabilities that result in large
humanitarian caseloads. The Health cluster aims to ensure
that humanitarian and development activities are coherently
aligned to provide sustainable and durable solutions to
at-risk groups, effectively minimising vulnerabilities and
subsequently reinforcing resilience.
Inputs provided by the Health cluster. For detailed response strategies and specific cluster objectives and indicators see the cluster page on
humanitarianresponse.info
COST COMPARISION PER PERSON ASSISTED 2018-21 (US$)
2018 2019 2020 2021
26 35 32 31
The Health cluster requires $51.9m in 2019 in order to assist 1.5 million people,
which equates to $34.60 per person assisted. The per capita cost for the upcoming
year is higher than the amount for 2018 which was $26.30 per person assisted.
This change is due to several factors. In 2019, there is a higher caseload in terms of
slow-onset natural disaster-affected people who will require emergency life-saving
primary health services through rapid-response modalities such as MHTs. The
cost of establishing MHTs is higher per person assisted than using existing health
facilities. In addition, the increased need for rehabilitation among people with
conflict-related injuries is now being included. The cost per person assisted for
rehabilitation services is generally higher than other expenses given the technical
nature of these services. 2020 and 2021 costs have been estimated based on
projected targets and requirements.
PART II: Nutrition
44
NUTRITION
REQUIREMENTS (US$)
57.6M
PEOPLE TO BE ASSISTED
1M
The Nutrition cluster aims to ensure timely
access to a package of life-saving emergency
services to nutritionally-vulnerable and
acutely malnourished children under five, as
well as pregnant and lactating women (PLW)
in provinces with a critical emergency-level
nutrition situation. In addition, vulnerable
children and PLW with heightened risk of
malnutrition and mortality among IDPs,
returnees, refugees and drought-affected
communities, are also priorities for the
nutrition response.
Multi-year strategy
The Nutrition sector is targeting almost a
million boys, girls and women in 2019 with
an overall funding requirements of $57.6
million. The priority emergency nutrition
response activities for 2019 include outpatient
and in-patient treatment for SAM;
case management of Moderate Acute
Malnutrition (MAM) for children (6-59
months); targeted supplementary feeding for
under-nourished PLW; emergency blanket
supplementary feeding for children (6-23
months); Infant and young child feeding
practices in emergency (IYCF-E) services for
mothers and children; and the provision of
micro-nutrient supplements to children (6-59
months). The cluster is working to strengthen
referrals between the various components
of emergency nutrition services and ensure
a continuum of care for patients with acute
malnutrition.
It is important to note that children with
MAM have an increased risk of mortality,
infections and impaired physical and
cognitive development compared to wellnourished
children. Therefore, not having
targeted nutrition-specific activities to
address MAM in this context places children
with MAM at excessive risk of adverse
outcomes.
Nutrition needs in 2020 and 2021 are
expected to remain more or less the same as
in 2019 with just marginal increases in the
number of acutely malnourished children
and PLWs in line with population growth.
Although the drought situation is expected
to subside, evidence suggests that the basic/
underlying causal factors of malnutrition
(i.e. poverty, food insecurity, poor health
infrastructure etc.) are likely to deteriorate
or remain unimproved in the coming
years. The nutrition programme is mainly
treatment-oriented and has low coverage
when compared to overall need. Unless it
is complemented with other multi-sector
preventive programmes, it will not have
significant impact in reducing burden.
It is anticipated that the same priority
activities will continue to be implemented in
2020 and 2021, with an annual increase of
about 15 per cent of the target. The number
of nutrition facilities providing integrated
management of acute malnutrition (IMAM),
with both SAM and MAM treatment
services, will be progressively increased.
- 0.09M 0.05M 0.05M 0.02M 0.03M - 1.89M
- 0.08M 0.05M 0.05M 0.01M 0.03M - 0.74M
81 | 19 | 0%
78 | 22 | 0%
PEOPLE IN
NEED
PEOPLE TO
BE ASSISTED
FINANCIAL
REQUIREMENTS
Access to
basic
services
% children,
women,
men*
CONFLICT POPULATION MOVEMENT NATURAL DISASTERS ACCESS BY SEX & AGE
Conflictaffected
Conflictdisplaced
Suddenonset
Slowonset
Natural
disasterdisplaced
Afghan
returnees
Pakistani
Refugees
*Children (<18
years old), men,
women (adult
>18 years old)
SECTOR: $57.6M REFUGEE CHAPTER: - TOTAL: $57.6M
CONTACTS
Anteneh Dobamo
Cluster Coordinator
adobamo@unicef.org
Bijoy Sarker
Cluster Co-lead
nutcc@afactionagainsthunger.
org
BREAKDOWN OF PEOPLE IN NEED AND PEOPLE TO BE ASSISTED BY VULNERABLE GROUP, SEX AND AGE
2019 PEOPLE IN NEED
2.1M
PART II: Nutrition
45 #
Response approach
The Nutrition cluster has prioritised provinces with a GAM
rate of 10 per cent and above for emergency nutrition
services; and over 70 per cent of nutritionally-at-risk PLW
and children under five in emergency-affected population
groups (returnees, refugees, disaster-affected communities
and IDPs). A total of 22 provinces (Badakhshan, Badghis,
Bamyan, Daykundi, Farah, Faryab, Ghazni, Ghor, Hilmand,
Jawzjan, Kandahar, Khost, Kunar, Nangarhar, Nuristan,
Paktika, Paktya, Parwan, Takhar, Uruzgan, Wardak, Zabul) are
prioritised for emergency response with more than 1.1 million
people to be assisted. The Nutrition cluster targets are set with
an aim of achieving at least 50 per cent coverage of the people
in need for most nutrition in emergencies (NiE) services. This
is in line with the SPHERE standard minimum coverage for
most NiE services in predominantly rural populations.
Sixty per cent of children with SAM are targeted for outpatient
treatment services and 10 per cent of all out-patient
SAM cases are ultimately expected to need in-patient
treatment. Thirty per cent of MAM children under five and 40
per cent of under-nourished PLW benefit from the targeted
supplementary feeding programme (TSFP). In addition, more
than 70 per cent of children and PLW affected by rapidonset
crises are targeted for emergency nutrition services
such as IYCF-E support, micronutrient supplementation
or the blanket supplementary feeding programme (BSFP).
Emergency nutrition services (IYCF-E, BSFP, micronutrient
supplementation) are planned for the initial phase (three to
six months) of the emergency response for people affected
by rapid-onset crises. Thereafter these groups will receive
assistance through BPHS partners’ routine preventative and
treatment services.
The Nutrition cluster aims to progressively increase the
coverage of emergency nutrition services during the next
three years. The ongoing scale-up of IMAM services through
de-centralised delivery mechanisms such as basic health
centres (BHC) and sub-health centres (SHC); the roll-out of
the nutrition counsellor’s package (a new cadre of nutrition
workers assigned to health facilities), as well as capacitydevelopment
on monitoring and reporting will enable the
attainment of progressively increased coverage of treatment
and preventive services in the coming years.
The Nutrition cluster will explore the possibility of employing
cash as an alternative and complementary modalities of
assistance in 2019. Drawing from experiences in nutritionsensitive
cash programming in global humanitarian
emergencies, the Nutrition cluster will adopt a cash modality,
wherever appropriate, over subsequent years of the HRP.
In the meantime, the Nutrition cluster will coordinate with
the CVWG to determine the feasibility and appropriateness
of cash modalities during the first phases of an emergency.
Where food assistance is substituted with cash transfers, social
and behavioural change communications (SBCC) activities
on appropriate feeding will be implemented to influence and
encourage the expenditure preference of families towards
nutritious food for young children and nursing women.
Inter-sector programming
Nutrition cluster partners will continue to engage with other
nutrition-sensitive sectors (e.g. WASH, Health, FSAC and
EiE) to maximise optimal nutritional outcomes. Emergency
nutrition services are typically delivered either through the
existing health facility platforms and/or through emergency
mobile teams. The mobile nutrition teams in hard-to-reach
areas have started to evolve into ‘Nutrition-plus’ mobile
teams by integrating essential child healthcare services
like immunisation, integrated management of childhood
illnesses (IMCI) for children, maternal care services, and
nutritional care. Acutely malnourished children with medical
complications are referred to higher-level health facilities
for better diagnosis and treatment. In coordination with
the WASH cluster, emergency hygiene kits will be provided
to acutely malnourished children and their care-givers
wherever resources permit, while minimum handwashing
facilities will also be set-up at in-patient and out-patient
nutrition service centres. Health and nutrition staff and
volunteers provide messages and health education sessions
PEOPLE IN NEED, PEOPLE TO RECEIVE ASSISTANCE,
FINANCIAL REQUIREMENTS & CASH ASSISTANCE (2019-21)
2019 2020 2021
People in need 2.13M 2.12M 2.16M
People to be assisted 1M 0.92M 0.93M
Requirements (US$) 57.6M 57.6M 58.9M
Target share of
assistance in cash (%) 0% 0% 0%
Assistance to be
provided in cash (US$) 0 0 0
Inputs provided by the Nutrition cluster. For detailed response strategies and specific cluster objectives and indicators see the cluster page on
humanitarianresponse.info
PART II: Nutrition
46
on appropriate nutrition and health practices both at facility
and community-level. Integration with food security and
livelihoods, as well as cash-based programming will further be
strengthened through co-location and convergence of blanket
supplementary food distributions, alongside the provision of
emergency food assistance.
Efficiencies & effectiveness of multi-year
programming
The multi-year nutrition response strategy provides an
opportunity to gradually scale-up nutrition services in priority
locations in order to reach the most needy and vulnerable
populations. This will also enable partners to build the
capacity of facility and community-based health and nutrition
staff to provide quality nutrition services by progressively
increasing coverage and effectiveness. Mobile teams providing
emergency nutrition care for children and women will
gradually hand-over these ongoing services to the nearest
health facilities for greater sustainability and ownership.
Joint monitoring and supervision visits will regularly be
conducted together with provincial and national-level MoPH
counterparts to ensure quality services, as well as on-the-job
training for field staff. The multi-year response plan is also
expected to ease logistics constraints and improve the supply
of nutrition treatment such as ready-to-use therapeutic and
supplementary food through long-term planning and prepositioning
in priority provinces.
Meeting funding requirements through long-term
commitments from donors may remain a potential
challenge. An exit and expansion strategy for each province/
district will be made through informed decision-making
processes, based on the severity of the nutrition situation and
caseloads identified through nutrition surveys (Standardised
Monitoring and Assessment of Relief and Transition or
SMART survey, Rapid SMART surveys), surveillance (Health
Management Information System or HMIS) and monthly
nutrition reports.
Links to development programming
Malnutrition is a multi-causal problem which requires an
integrated, holistic programming approach. Therefore, the
package of emergency nutrition activities is designed in such a
way that it takes advantage of and complements the ongoing,
longer-term health and nutrition service delivery mechanisms
such as the BPHS. Prevention-oriented One-UN framework
programmes complement the Nutrition cluster’s more
treatment-focused emergency programmes by strengthening
referral linkages between prevention and treatment services,
as well as contributing to enhancement of recovery,
minimising the risk of relapse for acutely malnourished
children and PLW enrolled in treatment programmes.
COST COMPARISION PER PERSON ASSISTED 2018-21 (US$)
2018 2019 2020 2021
89 60 62 63
The nutrition cluster requires $57.5 million to respond to the needs of almost
a million people. Last year, the cluster required $63.4 million to reach 700,000
people. The cost per person assisted has now reduced from $89.40 to $60 per
person. The cost reduction is attributed to an expected decline in prices of ready-touse
supplementary food commodities in 2019, already observed since the second
quarter of 2018. 2020 and 2021 costs have been estimated based on projected
targets and requirements.
PART II: Protecti on
47 #
2019 PEOPLE IN NEED PROTECTION
2.4M
REQUIREMENTS (US$)
44.7M
PEOPLE TO BE ASSISTED
1.3M
The Protection cluster will focus on
strengthening strategic and operational
protection frameworks, capacity-building
for internal and external actors (including
communities and authorities on planning
and implementing protection); resource
mobilisation, and advocacy, all with the
ultimate aim of contributing to reducing
exposure of crisis-affected communities to
physical and psychological violence and
abuse. The goal is to better equip them to
pursue dignified solutions to address the
consequences of conflict and displacement
through strengthened respect for IHL and
IHRL, enhanced access to basic services and
increased capacities, and resilience to prevent
and mitigate protection threats. The Protection
cluster will continue to pursue better
integration and protection mainstreaming
in the activities of other clusters and
governmental counterparts.
Multi-year strategy
The cluster will focus on the following priority
activities from 2019 to 2021:
••Protection monitoring, including incident
monitoring, to inform the response
(expansion of protection services,
including through referrals to specialised
service providers) and evidence-based
advocacy targeting both conflict and
drought-affected communities (displaced
and non-displaced);
••Humanitarian negotiation, engagement
and capacity-building targeted at armed
actors, authorities and conflict-affected
communities (with a focus on hard-toreach
areas) to enhance the protection of
civilians and respect for IHL (including
enhanced protection of education and
healthcare facilities and personnel);
••Provision of community-based
psychosocial support, with a focus on
women and children;
••Legal assistance around housing, land and
property (HLP) and legal documentation
issues, with a focus on vulnerable displaced
and returnee households;
••Landmine clearance, explosive ordinance
disposal, surveying and mine risk
education (MRE);
••An effort to ensure that at-risk GBV
survivors who are IDPs, returnees and
other conflict- and disaster-affected
people receive assistance through a multisector
response (legal, safety, health and
psychosocial support);
•• Strengthening of community-based child
protection systems, awareness-raising
and sensitisation, capacity-building,
psychosocial support, case management
and referral pathways; and
••Durable solutions, in the context of
the humanitarian/development nexus,
following an area-based approach.
Services are expected to remain largely the
same in 2019, as the conflict is expected to
continue, with an assumption that violence
1.39M 0.25M 0.12M 0.22M 0.05M 0.02M 0.34M -
0.49M 0.25M 0.10M 0.11M 0.03M 0.02M 0.34M -
66 | 17 | 17%
71 | 16 | 13%
PEOPLE IN
NEED
PEOPLE TO
BE ASSISTED
FINANCIAL
REQUIREMENTS
Access to
basic
services
% children,
women,
men*
CONFLICT POPULATION MOVEMENT NATURAL DISASTERS ACCESS BY SEX & AGE
Conflictaffected
Conflictdisplaced
Suddenonset
Slowonset
Natural
disasterdisplaced
Afghan
returnees
Pakistani
Refugees
*Children (<18
years old), men,
women (adult
>18 years old)
SECTOR: $51.4M REFUGEE CHAPTER: - TOTAL: $51.4M
CONTACTS
Stefan Gherman
Senior Cluster
Coordinator
ghermans@unhcr.org
Andrea Castorina
Co-lead
andrea.castorina@nrc.no
BREAKDOWN OF PEOPLE IN NEED AND PEOPLE TO BE ASSISTED BY VULNERABLE GROUP, SEX AND AGE
PART II: Protecti on
48
may intensify in the run-up to the presidential elections and
in advance of any peace talks, but that this may subside in
2020 and 2021 along with the effects of the drought. As such
2020 and 2021 may see lower numbers of people in need of
protection and, as such, lower sector targets for 2020-2021.
Response approach
In 2019, the Protection cluster is targeting 1.3 million persons
of concern (POCs) with protection services, while the number
is expected to decrease to 820,000 in 2020 and 780,000 in 2021.
Priority geographic areas for the Protection Cluster response
in 2019 and beyond are provinces which have been, and will
continue to be, particularly affected by outstanding protection
risks due to active conflict, drought, displacement and returns.
This prioritisation has been based on the analysis of results
produced by country-wide needs assessments and related
severity mapping exercises. As such, the Protection cluster will
prioritise the following provinces, in order of need, throughout
the period 2019-2021: Nangarhar, Kunar, Kandahar, Uruzgan,
Hilmand, Hirat, Badghis, Faryab, Kunduz, Kabul, Ghazni,
Zabul, Farah, Sar-e-Pul, Laghman, Ghor and Balkh.
Based on current and projected protection analysis, conflictaffected
communities (both displaced and non-displaced)
will continue to be considered the first priority group for the
Protection cluster response; while drought-displaced, droughtaffected
non-displaced, and returnees (both documented
and undocumented) will be the other categories of PoCs
to be assisted by the cluster. The cluster will be prioritising
particularly vulnerable groups across the above-mentioned
categories for tailored assistance: women, children, people with
disabilities, minorities and other people with specific needs
(PSNs) such as female heads-of-household, elderly heads-ofhousehold,
child heads-of-household, and people with critical
medical conditions. Based on conflict and natural disaster
dynamics, the above-mentioned targeting will be reviewed
periodically throughout the HRP period. The Protection
cluster will continue to analyse the protection environment and
subsequent humanitarian needs in order to maintain flexibility
in the response.
The Protection cluster only has cash engagement with returnees
(refugees or undocumented), in the form of a cash grant,
largely implemented by UNHCR and IOM. All other types
of engagement are not focused on distribution, apart from
the GBV sub-cluster’s distribution of dignity kits, which will
remain in-kind, due to its purpose and components. The other
implemented activities are not suited to cash as a modality, for
example protection monitoring, referrals, explosive ordnance
disposal (EOD) and advocacy. These are either soft response
components or are implemented through specific modalities
which partner organisations cannot deviate from.
Inter-sector programming
Protection considerations will be reflected throughout
the humanitarian response at different levels. While all
humanitarian actors involved in the response will be supported
in order to help them fulfil their obligations to deliver safe
programming (do no harm, conflict sensitivity, accountability,
participation, etc.), specific protection components will be
integrated, when relevant and appropriate, into multi-sectoral
responses to achieve broader protective outcomes. In order to
mitigate obstacles and risks associated to the implementation
of sensitive, stand-alone protection activities, the Protection
cluster will be strengthening collaboration with other
humanitarian actors to integrate protection components into
the work of other sectors, which it is hoped will improve access,
increase community acceptance and outreach. The cluster will
also continue to provide guidance on how other sectoral work
can be improved in order to contribute to protection outcomes,
and how to increase the accountability of all humanitarian
action.
As such, field protection staff with complementary
competencies (e.g. protection monitors, psychosocial
support counsellors, case managers) will be integrated into
emergency assessment and response teams (especially ESNFI,
Health, Nutrition, WASH), which will allow timely and
conflict-sensitive identification and referral of protection
cases. Moreover, protection advocacy and community-based
engagement and response will be integrated into health and
education responses with specific reference to IHL violations,
especially attacks against health and education facilities,
personnel and civilians accessing those services, as per the
previously outlined common strategy in 2018.
PEOPLE IN NEED, PEOPLE TO RECEIVE ASSISTANCE,
FINANCIAL REQUIREMENTS & CASH ASSISTANCE (2019-21)
2019 2020 2021
People in need 2.40M 1.92M 1.68M
People to be assisted 1.34M 0.82M 0.78M
Requirements (US$)* 44.7M 33.9M 29.1M
Target share of
assistance in cash (%) 0% 0% 0%
Assistance to be
provided in cash (US$) 0 0 0
*Figures for 2020 and 2021 do not yet include IOM and UNHCR cash grant requirements.
PART II: Protecti on
49 #
Efficiencies & effectiveness of multi-year
programming
It is envisaged that large-scale conflict, coupled with the
negative impact of natural disasters, will remain the main
driver of protection needs throughout 2021. PoCs are often in
need of more than one kind of protection support, due to their
particular situation, and the Protection cluster will continue to
target PoCs with multiple services, exercising caution to avoid
duplication and assess the necessity of response on a case-bycase
basis.
Protection capacities in Afghanistan are very weak and the
presence of actors is not always best configured in areas of
predictably-high conflict around the country. Also, insufficient
funding and an inadequate focus on durable solutions by
the international community at large are challenges that are
expected to remain largely unaddressed, despite ongoing efforts.
These efforts include advocacy with relevant government
authorities around land allocation for local integration and
principled relocation processes (versus forced evictions and
forced returns); technical support to relevant government
authorities on the reform of the land allocation scheme carried
out by the Housing, Land, and Property Taskforce (HLP-TF);
legal assistance and counselling around legal documentation,
including personal IDs and security of tenure carried out by
specialised cluster partners which contributes to enhanced
access to services and job opportunities; ICCT guidance on
durable solutions in the drought response; and communitybased
outreach and services aimed at enhancing social cohesion
and co-existence.
Focusing on multi-year service delivery enables more
appropriate capacity development, remedial action, and
environment-building work to be undertaken. Better
integration with development programming continues to
be needed in order to achieve these tasks, as well as closer
coordination and advocacy with the authorities at both central
and local levels. Given this, the cluster is not envisaging a
realistic possibility of de-activation by 2021, as the conflict
will probably remain a major driver of needs in the Protection
sector, combined with large-scale poverty.
Links to development programming
While the Protection cluster will continue to be mainly focused
on humanitarian protection assistance to address the most
outstanding safety issues arising from crisis, it will be crucial to
closely work with development actors to facilitate systemic work
allowing for a transition towards peace-building, stabilisation,
durable solutions and development. Poverty, socio-economic
and ethnic discrimination, as well as a lack of access to
basic services will have to be structurally addressed through
development funding, while humanitarian protection should
be better bridged to development through the provision of
durable solutions aimed at ending the disadvantageous effects
of displacement.
In particular, peace and reconciliation will need to be
built through human rights-focused engagement, the
implementation of and insistence on the rule of law, as well as
the expansion of services for facilitation of durable solutions
and social cohesion. From this perspective, a political solution
to the ongoing conflict, the establishment of appropriate
transitional justice mechanisms (peace and reconciliation,
prosecution of criminal cases, etc.), expansion of public
services, creation of job opportunities, the establishment and
expansion of government safety nets for particularly vulnerable
categories of people, sustainable housing solutions (starting
with land allocation and the provision of security of tenure to
displaced and returning communities) should be considered
priorities by development actors, in close collaboration with
humanitarian actors.
Inputs provided by the Protection cluster. For detailed response strategies and specific cluster objectives and indicators see the cluster page on
humanitarianresponse.info
COST COMPARISION PER PERSON ASSISTED 2018-21 (US$)
2018 2019 2020 2021
40 30 37 32
The average cost per person assisted in 2019 is $30.18 compared to $39.60 in
2018. This slight variation results from better targeting of activities, as well as
from the fact that the numbers of conflict-related IDPs and refugee returnees are
generally reduced compared to last year and the budgetary requirements are
correspondingly being reduced.
PART II: Water , Sanitation & Hygiene
50
WATER, SANITATION & HYGIENE
REQUIREMENTS (US$)
36.4M
PEOPLE TO BE ASSISTED
1.3M
The overall objective of the WASH cluster
during 2019-2021 is to contribute to
improving the health and dignity of people
affected by emergencies, through the effective
and timely implementation of emergency
preparedness and response activities in water,
sanitation and hygiene, with a priority of
reaching the most vulnerable families first.
Multi-year strategy
Key humanitarian WASH activities in 2019
will include: the provision of sufficient safe
water, emergency sanitation, and hygiene
awareness promotion, supported with a
means of improving hygiene. A total of 1.3
million people will be assisted by WASH
partners in 2019, of whom 49 per cent
are women. With the forecast of El Niño
weather conditions bringing above average
precipitation in 2019-2020, ameliorating the
impact of the drought, and the potential for
a negotiated political settlement, the WASH
cluster estimates a slight reduction in related
humanitarian needs in 2020 and 2021. As
such there will be lower HRP targets moving
forward: 860,000 people for 2020 and 720,000
people for 2021.
Response approach
For 2019, the top priority will be the
provision of WASH packages (water supply
by tankering, sanitation and hygiene) for
drought-displaced families in Badghis and
Hirat. Drought-affected families in their
place of origin will be assisted with durable
water supply solutions. Immediate relief
activities (water tankering, expansion/
rehabilitation of water systems, emergency
latrines and hygiene promotion) to save the
lives of natural disaster-affected and conflictdisplaced
people will also be a priority. The
WASH cluster is committed to maintaining
services for returnees at the border (the zero
point and transit centres). Based on needs
assessments,72 about 70 per cent of returnees
end-up living in informal settlements or
with host communities with limited or no
WASH services where they face elevated
risks of disease and will need intermediate to
long-term solutions including rehabilitation
or installation of new water points and the
provision of emergency latrines.
Communities hosting IDPs/returnees,
those living in hard-to-reach districts and
Pakistani refugees living in Khost will also
need assistance with durable solutions. Given
the trend over recent years, the needs of all
the above-mentioned categories, apart from
slow-onset emergency (drought) still need to
be prioritised for 2020 and 2021, albeit with
progressively reduced caseloads.
Western region provinces such as Badghis,
Ghor and Hirat are facing severe drought
conditions. Drought IDPs living in informal
settlements in Hirat and Qala-e-Naw will
need continuous assistance until the middle
of 2019. There is an urgent need to scale-up
the response with durable solutions in places
- 0.40M 0.20M 0.16M 0.05M 0.14M 0.37M 0.83M
- 0.30M 0.16M 0.13M 0.04M 0.10M 0.30M 0.27M
59 | 20 | 21%
59 | 20 | 21%
PEOPLE IN
NEED
PEOPLE TO
BE ASSISTED
FINANCIAL
REQUIREMENTS
Access to
basic
services
% children,
women,
men*
CONFLICT POPULATION MOVEMENT NATURAL DISASTERS ACCESS BY SEX & AGE
Conflictaffected
Conflictdisplaced
Suddenonset
Slowonset
Natural
disasterdisplaced
Afghan
returnees
Pakistani
Refugees
*Children (<18
years old), men,
women (adult
>18 years old)
SECTOR: $36.4M REFUGEE CHAPTER: - TOTAL: $36.4M
BREAKDOWN OF PEOPLE IN NEED AND PEOPLE TO BE ASSISTED BY VULNERABLE GROUP, SEX AND AGE
CONTACTS
Ramesh Bhusal
Cluster Coordinator
rbhusal@unicef.org
Abdul Malik Temory
National Co-lead
malik.temory@mrrd.gov.af
2019 PEOPLE IN NEED
2.1M
PART II: Water , Sanitation & Hygiene
51 #
of origin, not only in Badghis, Ghor and Hirat, but also in the
southern and northern regions which are affected by drought
in places such as Balkh, Faryab, Hilmand, Jawzjan, Kunduz,
Nimroz and Zabul. The timely supply of water by tankering
in 2018 in many of these provinces prevented displacement.
Hence, it is critical to build new water points or to rehabilitate
existing ones to enable displaced people to stay and prevent
further displacement. People displaced by conflict have been
experiencing acute shortages of WASH services and needs
are more immediate in provinces with higher IDP caseloads
which include Badakhshan, Badghis, Balkh, Faryab, Hilmand,
Kunduz, Nangarhar, Takhar and Zabul.
People affected by rapid-onset emergencies (especially
floods) also need immediate assistance. Past trends indicate
that Badghis, Sar-e-Pul and Takhar provinces usually face
more natural disasters. Families of both documented and
undocumented returnees, especially those from Pakistan,
face a higher risk of lack of access to WASH services: Kabul,
Kandahar and Nangarhar are the provinces with highest need.
Pakistani refugees living in Khost continue to suffer from
limited WASH services and high risk of disease outbreaks.
Diarrhoeal and under-five child malnutrition rates are much
higher than the national average among conflict-affected
communities living in hard-to-reach districts, due to limited
WASH services and hence also need to be prioritised.
In 2015-2016, ERM partners used cash-for-WASH NFI
(cash was given instead of hygiene kits). Post-distribution
monitoring found that more than two-thirds of women
reported that they did not get any benefit from cash compared
to in-kind hygiene kits which they could control in terms of
distribution and use. Partner feedback also suggests that over
80 per cent of IDP or returnee households are headed by men
who do not consider hygiene to be a major issue and so do not
prioritise hygiene supplies for spending. In general, according
to the Danish Committee for Aid to Afghan Refugees
(DACAAR),73 female beneficiaries do not have any control
over the money they receive and do not have sufficient market
access to use the cash. On the other hand, experience shows
that providing in-kind kits, coupled with hygiene messages,
makes an impact on women and encourages them to adopt
safer hygiene behaviours which prevent illness. Given cultural
beliefs and barriers around the use of water and sanitation,
the WASH cluster concludes that it is still too early to replace
in-kind with cash for WASH services.
Inter-sector programming
Nationally, more than a quarter of health facilities lack basic
water and sanitation services, including a place for handwashing
for medical staff where there is soap and water
available. Such conditions compromise the efficacy of health
and nutrition activities, especially during emergencies when
the facilities are overcrowded. WASH in schools is an essential
element of creating an enabling environment for children to
attend classes, including protection from infectious diseases
(40 per cent of school-going children contract diarrhoeal
diseases in schools). With over half of formal schools
lacking WASH services in their yard, additional caseloads
resulting from returnee/IDP children and the absence of
WASH services mean an exposure to a highly contagious
environment.
The WASH cluster will coordinate with Health, Nutrition and
Education in Emergencies partners to provide WASH services
in health facilities, therapeutic feeding centres, child-friendly
spaces and temporary learning centres in a systematic way.
An inter-sector strategy will be developed to ensure such
integration is done in a strategic manner. Collaboration will
be enhanced with FSAC to ensure that both drought IDPs and
families receiving food assistance in informal settlements or
places of origin also receive sufficient quantity of safe water
and hygiene promotion messages. Even the highest quality
WASH services become ineffective if families are living in
makeshift shelters (or in the open air), exposing children
and women to hostile environments (cold, wind and dust).
The WASH cluster will work closely with Shelter colleagues
to ensure that quality WASH services are provided for all
families in conjunction with quality shelter.
Efficiencies & effectiveness of multi-year
programming
The multi-year HRP is a positive development that is expected
to allow more time for improving the quality of response and
collaboration with development partners. The cluster database
shows that a sizable number of IDPs and returnees live with
PEOPLE IN NEED, PEOPLE TO RECEIVE ASSISTANCE,
FINANCIAL REQUIREMENTS & CASH ASSISTANCE (2019-21)
2019 2020 2021
People in need 2.14M 1.48M 1.27M
People to be assisted 1.3M 0.86M 0.72M
Requirements (US$) 36.4M 27.2M 25.5M
Target share of
assistance in cash (%) 0% 0% 0%
Assistance to be
provided in cash (US$) - - -
PART II: Water , Sanitation & Hygiene
52
host communities and share water sources. With the increased
number of people sharing water points, which are often in
a dilapidated condition, there is a risk of water shortages
and high wear-and-tear on functioning water points due to
over-use. Over-crowded facilities are also a major source of
contamination and assist in spreading disease. In addition,
over-crowding can trigger tension among users leading to
conflict between new arrivals and host communities.
The multi-year HRP provides opportunities to focus on
durable solutions that can cater to the needs of both IDP/
returnees and host communities and hence create an enabling
environment for integration. Likewise, there are many
communities, especially in hard-to-reach districts of Badghis,
Faryab and Jawzjan that live in areas deprived of improved
water sources and have limited underground or surface water
sources. These are also the areas with highest food insecurity,
needing food assistance for most of the year. These areas need
water tankering every year during the summer. With a multiyear
HRP, the cluster hopes that there will be donor support
for partners to plan integrated and longer-term projects
in these areas, thus reducing vulnerabilities and ongoing
dependency on humanitarian food and water assistance. Such
longer-term projects provide opportunities for more intense
community consultation and for better utilisation of local
resources.
Links to development programming
A tailored humanitarian response in the place of origin will
help improve the displacement situation, but in order to
reverse the phenomenon, there is a need for strong, integrated,
multi-sectoral development action that not only addresses the
immediate survival needs of the population but also creates
livelihoods opportunities looking ahead. People affected by
slow-onset (drought) and protracted crises, returnees and
IDPs among the host communities, as well as conflict-affected
communities who suffer from chronic shortages of basic
services, all lack sufficient presence of humanitarian and
development actors in their area to assist. This remains an
ongoing problem. Focused and prioritised programming by
both development and humanitarian actors in these areas to
build resilient WASH infrastructure and enhance community
awareness (e.g. improved hygiene and sanitation knowledge)
will contribute to reducing the disease burden and will
improve nutrition. Resilient communities are also better able
to cope with rapid-onset emergencies like natural disaster.
Inputs provided by the WASH cluster. For detailed response strategies and specific cluster objectives and indicators see the cluster page on
humanitarianresponse.info
COST COMPARISION PER PERSON ASSISTED 2018-21 (US$)
2018 2019 2020 2021
31 29 32 35
The WASH cluster requires $36.44m in 2019 in order to assist 1.28 million people.
The per capita cost for 2019 ($28.50) is slightly lower than HRP 2018 ($31.30)
where a total of 800,000 people were targeted for an estimated budget of $24
million. The reason for the lower cost per person in 2019 is due to the fact that
more than 20 per cent of the caseload in 2019 (an estimated 274,000 people) are
as a result of the slow-onset emergency (drought) who will only need water supply
assistance, which is just one component of WASH services. In addition, 12 per cent
of the caseload are drought-displaced people (160,000) living in Hirat and Qala-e-
Naw. For the purposes of the WASH cluster’s calculations, it is assumed at least 40
per cent of this caseload, particularly from Qala-e-Naw, are expected to return to
their place of origin, and therefore would only need services for the first two-three
months of 2019. Considering this, the estimated per capita cost of $28.50 for 2019
is comparable with that of previous years and is in line with the global and regional
inflation rate. 2020 and 2021 costs have been estimated based on projected targets
and requirements.
PART II: Multi-purpose ca sh assistance
53 #
MULTI-PURPOSE CASH ASSISTANCE
REQUIREMENTS (US$)
23.9M
PEOPLE TO BE ASSISTED
0.5M
Multi-purpose cash (MPC) assistance is
primarily used by humanitarian partners
in Afghanistan as a short-term, emergency
support for recently-displaced households -
either conflict IDPs or returnees from Iran or
Pakistan. MPC is seen as a more flexible and
efficient way of covering the various needs
of displaced people (e.g. shelter, NFI, food,
transport etc.) compared to sector-specific,
in-kind or cash grants. MPC allows people to
choose how to allocate the assistance package
they receive to meet their specific needs
which vary depending on household-level
characteristics, as well as their location and
the cause of their displacement/needs.
Multi-year strategy
There are two main types of MPC assistance
provided by partners in Afghanistan.
Firstly, emergency MPC grants are provided
through the ERM and other NGO partners
to recently-displaced conflict IDPs, to cover
their needs for one or two months. The value
of these emergency MPC grants is based
on the SMEB approach - i.e. the estimated
amount of cash needed for a displaced
household in Afghanistan to cover all of its
basic needs for one month (including food,
shelter, NFI, transport and basic health).
This is currently set at 17,000 AFN ($227)
per household for the first month and 11,000
AFN ($147) for the second month (total
of 28,0000 AFN or $373 for two months).
Secondly, post-arrival cash grants are also
provided to documented and undocumented
returnees from Iran and Pakistan by UNHCR
and IOM . The value of these grants is not
based on the SMEB but rather is calculated
to cover specific needs (e.g. transport
and re-integration support in the case of
documented returnees and transport and NFI
for undocumented returnees). The IOM cash
grant is, on average, $275 per household,74
while the UNHCR grant is on average $200
per person ($1,400 for a household of 7
people which is the average household size
used for all other MPC grants).
Emergency MPC assistance for conflict IDPs
is provided across the country in accordance
with needs. In 2018, this included Ghazni,
Farah, Faryab and Kunduz provinces -
although smaller-scale displacement (and an
associated MPC response) occurred across
most of the country (with the exception
of the Central Highland region). While
displacement is expected to continue in 2019
and beyond, given the volatility and fluidity
of the current political and security situation
it is difficult to predict with certainty the
areas which will be most affected or the exact
numbers which will be generated. As such,
an agile and flexible response will therefore
be required. In 2019, partners plan to assist
350,000 conflict IDPs through MPC (the
projected target caseloads for 2020 and 2021
are 315,000 people and 280,000, respectively
– based on the assumption that the conflict
may subside over time given new-found
opportunities for peace and that the current
CONTACT
Anna Law
CVWG Chair
anna.law@nrc.no
Shereen Noori
Co-chair
shereen.noori@wfp.org
- - - - - - - -
- 0.35M - 0.16M - - - -
-
59 | 20 | 21%
PEOPLE IN
NEED
PEOPLE TO
BE ASSISTED
FINANCIAL
REQUIREMENTS
Access to
basic
services
% children,
women,
men*
CONFLICT POPULATION MOVEMENT NATURAL DISASTERS ACCESS BY SEX & AGE
Conflictaffected
Conflictdisplaced
Suddenonset
Slowonset
Natural
disaster
displaced
Afghan
returnees
Pakistani
Refugees
*Children (<18
years old), men,
women (adult
>18 years old)
SECTOR: $23.9M REFUGEE CHAPTER: - TOTAL: $23.9M
BREAKDOWN OF PEOPLE IN NEED AND PEOPLE TO BE ASSISTED BY VULNERABLE GROUP, SEX AND AGE
PART II: Multi-purpose ca sh assistance
54
character of the conflict will continue to result in lower
numbers of IDPs.
Post-arrival MPC assistance for returnees is concentrated
in IOM and UNHCR’s transit/encashment centres located
at the border (e.g. Spin Boldak, Zaranj) or in main cities
(e.g. Hirat, Kabul, Mazar). In 2019, IOM plans to assist
163,000 undocumented returnees from Iran and Pakistan.
The projected target caseload for 2020 and 2021 is just over
165,000 people and almost 168,000 people, respectively –
based on the assumption that in the coming three years,
returns from Iran will increase slightly, while those from
Pakistan will decrease slightly.
Response approach
MPC grants are meant to cover most of the basic needs of a
displaced household in a single, consolidated grant, and thus
avoid the artificial distinctions of sector-specific cash grants.
However, it is important to note that there are some needs that
cannot be addressed through MPC (or cash more generally),
and can only be addressed through an in-kind provision
of specific services or infrastructure, such as many health,
education, protection or WASH-related needs. No amount
of cash given to households will ensure that local clinics are
staffed and stocked with medical supplies, that schools are
open and safely accessible to students, or that latrines or
drinking water are available nearby.
MPC should therefore complement, rather than substitute,
such sectoral activities. Under the ERM for example, WASH
activities are systematically provided as in-kind support, along
with the MPC assistance. In 2019, more concerted effort will
be invested into ensuring that MPC activities - particularly for
conflict IDPs - are better linked with sector-specific services
and other in-kind assistance (e.g. better referral systems to
health programmes for conflict IDPs who have received MPC
assistance).
All MPC programmes in Afghanistan at the moment are
one-off, emergency grants meant to cover immediate survival
needs of displaced households, and thus do not aim to be
sustainable or to reduce the need for assistance in subsequent
years. However, emphasis will be placed in 2019 on ensuring
better linkages between this short-term MPC assistance and
longer-term durable solutions initiatives. Better linkages are
needed at two levels: (a) on the prevention side, ensuring
that longer-term development programmes (in particular
WASH, durable shelter and livelihoods-related activities)
target key areas of origin from which many of the IDPs who
receive MPC assistance typically come. It is hoped that this
will help prevent displacement and therefore reduce the
number of people who need to be supported with MPC;
and (b) on the early-recovery side, where the aim will be to
connect households that have received one-off emergency
MPC assistance with longer-term recovery assistance (in
particular related to livelihoods and shelter), either in their
place of displacement or their place of origin, depending on
the context. The aim is to ensure that displaced households
do not fall into chronic poverty and so do not return to the
humanitarian portfolio in subsequent years.
Inputs provided by the CVWG. For detailed response strategies and multi-purpose cash specific objectives and indicators see the working group page on
humanitarianresponse.info
PEOPLE IN NEED, PEOPLE TO RECEIVE ASSISTANCE,
FINANCIAL REQUIREMENTS & CASH ASSISTANCE (2019-21)
2019 2020 2021
People in need - - -
People to be assisted 0.51M 0.48M 0.45M
Requirements (US$)* 23.9M 22.3M 20.6M
Target share of
assistance in cash (%) 100% 100% 100%
Assistance to be
provided in cash (US$) 23.9M 22.3M 20.6M
* Financial requirements for MPC reflect transfer values only and implementation
costs will be factored in at a later date.
COST COMPARISION PER PERSON ASSISTED 2018-21 (US$)
2018 2019 2020 2021
73 47 46 46
The average cost per person assisted for MPC activities in 2019 is projected to be
$47, compared to $73 in 2018. This reduction in cost per person assisted is due
to the reduction in the average size of the MPC cash grant for conflict IDPs under
the ERM, with only the most vulnerable households now receiving two-months
assistance, while less vulnerable households only receive one month of assistance,
thus decreasing the average MPC cash grant size across all conflict IDPs from $429
in 2018 to $373 in 2019. 2020 and 2021 costs have been estimated based on
projected targets and requirements.
PART II: Refugee Chapter
55 #
2019 PEOPLE IN NEED REFUGEE CHAPTER
50K
REQUIREMENTS (US$)
8.8M
PEOPLE TO TO BE ASSISTED
50K
UNHCR’s strategy for Pakistani refugees
in Khost and Paktika will focus on scalingdown
direct activities and responsibly
handing-over coordination of the response
to the MoRR. UNHCR will continue to
ensure the protection of refugees of other
nationalities in urban areas, together with
the Government. Key emphasis will be
placed on promoting self-reliance through
community-based protection measures and
the provision of targeted assistance to people
with specific needs. UNHCR will advocate
for enactment of a National Refugee Law
and for the inclusion of refugees in national
priority programmes to facilitate their access
to essential services, particularly healthcare
and education, while continuing to monitor
the situation and providing support to the
Government.
Multi-year strategy
UNHCR’s multi-year strategy for 2019-2021
focuses on four foundations: protection
monitoring and data analysis; policy support
and capacity development; engaging the
humanitarian-development-peace nexus;
and facilitating durable solutions through
coordination and innovation. The strategy
reinforces the centrality of protection in
the humanitarian response, with advocacy,
coordination and partnership based on a
protection risk analysis, as well as effective
information management.
UNHCR will work in partnership with
local and international NGOs, other UN
agencies, and the Government, with a
focus on the following protection goals: (1)
building the capacity of the Government to
assume responsibility for coordinating the
refugee response; (2) effectively responding
to the protection risks faced by refugees;
(3) empowering communities to mitigate
protection risks and fostering integration and
peaceful co-existence through communitybased
protection measures; and (4) engaging
the Government, partners and diverse actors
to achieve sustainable solutions.
0 1 2 3 4 5
20K
50K
40K
30K
20K
50K
50K
50K**
20K
50K
40K
30K
15K
30K
40K
50K**
$0.4M
$4.1M
-
-
-
$4.3M
-
$8.8M
100| 0 | 0%
59 | 22 | 19%
59 | 22 | 19%
59 | 22 | 19%
74 | 26 | 0%
59 | 22 | 19%
59 | 22 | 19%
59 | 22 | 19%
100 | 0 | 0%
59 | 22 | 19%
59 | 22 | 19%
59 | 22 | 19%
76 | 24 | 0%
96 | 2 | 2%
59 | 22 | 19%
59 | 22 | 19%
EDUCATION IN
EMERGENCIES
EMERGENCY SHELTER
& NON-FOOD ITEMS
FOOD SECURITY &
AGRICULTURE
HEALTH
NUTRITION
PROTECTION
WATER, SANITATION
& HYGIENE
TOTAL
Total % children,
female,
male*
Total Financial
requirements
% children,
female,
male*
*Children (<18 years old), men, women PEOPLE IN NEED PEOPLE TO BE ASSISTED US$
(adult >18 years old)
**the total figure is not the total of the
column, as the same people may appear
several times
CONTACT
Jeff Savage
savagej@unhcr.org
BREAKDOWN OF PEOPLE IN AND PEOPLE TO BE ASSISTED BY SEX AND AGE
PART II: Refugee Chapter
56
Response approach
UNHCR will continue advocating for a principled approach to
ensure the eventual voluntary repatriation or local integration
of the refugee population in safety and dignity, making links
between regional and national frameworks for coherence
and complementarity. Activities with the refugee population
will focus mainly on Khost and Paktika provinces, where
some 75,000 refugees from Pakistan are currently residing.
Activities will also be implemented for about 500 refugees and
asylum-seekers of various nationalities living in Kabul and
other major cities.
The focus in the coming years will be on promoting selfreliance
through community-based protection measures
that target the most vulnerable, including cash-for-work
initiatives, rehabilitation of basic community and productive
infrastructure, market-driven technical and vocational
training, as well as self-help group approaches. The provision
of assistance, including food, shelter and NFI, will target
refugees with specific needs, while referrals to appropriate
service providers will be made to take advantage of
complementary programmes.
Inter-sector programming
UNHCR will advocate with government counterparts at the
national and provincial levels to increase refugees’ freedom
of movement and access to public services, with particular
emphasis on health and education. UNHCR and its partners
will implement activities that support vocational training
in marketable skills to refugee women and girls and others
who are particularly vulnerable, in addition to conditional
cash-for-school assistance to increase the number of refugee
girls who have access to primary and secondary education.
UNHCR will continue targeted advocacy with resettlement
countries on behalf of refugees with specific protection needs,
including refugees with serious medical conditions, femaleheaded
households, refugees from minority communities, and
others with protection needs.
UNHCR and its partners will continue to address the
immediate concerns of refugees with specific needs through
the provision of cash, NFI, and livestock support to mitigate
exposure to protection risks and negative coping mechanisms.
While Pakistani refugees in Khost and Paktika generally
benefit from the support of host communities and wellestablished
support networks within the population, many
among the urban caseload face heightened protection risks
due to isolation and having either limited or no community
support. This results in barriers to accessing basic services. In
this context, the support provided by UNHCR and its partners
is critical to ensuring a dignified existence and the realisation
of basic rights.
UNHCR provides cash to cover food, rental subsidies and
other basic needs to families who present with specific
vulnerabilities (approximately 10 per cent of the refugee
population). The amount is tailored to family composition
and specific circumstances, with needs re-assessed annually,
taking into account coping mechanisms that families have
developed and other sources of income they may have (e.g.
remittances). While structural and systematic challenges are
addressed, cash grants to support primary and secondary
education will continue to be provided, as needed. Cashbased
medical assistance will be provided to support
refugees, especially those with life-saving or chronic needs.
All activities will be addressed through a comprehensive
process of identification, assessment, verification, delivery
of assistance, and monitoring. While UNHCR has provided
winterisation assistance for many years, this programme will
be discontinued in 2019.
Efficiencies & effectiveness of multi-year
programming
Partnership is key to UNHCR’s multi-year strategy for
Afghanistan that aims, first and foremost, to provide
protection and solutions for refugees and others of concern.
Over the coming three years, UNHCR will expand
engagement with relevant government ministries, UN
agencies, NGOs and development partners to facilitate
integration, while advocating for the inclusion of refugees
in national services. By the end of 2021, UNHCR hopes to
achieve durable solutions for the majority of the refugee
population from Pakistan’s North Waziristan Agency, with the
ultimate aim of facilitating their return to Pakistan in safety
and dignity or their formal integration into Afghanistan’s
PEOPLE IN NEED, PEOPLE TO RECEIVE ASSISTANCE,
FINANCIAL REQUIREMENTS & CASH ASSISTANCE (2019-21)
2019 2020 2021
People in need 0.05M 0.05M 0.05M
People to be assisted 0.05M 0.05M 0.05M
Requirements (US$) 8.8M 8.8M 8.8M
Target share of
assistance in cash (%) 3% 3% 3%
Assistance to be
provided in cash (US$) 0.2M 0.2M 0.2M
* Requirements for 2020 and 2021 are estimates only and assume that refugee
numbers will remain unchanged.
PART II: Refugee Chapter
57 #
society. In this regard, UNHCR will engage with the
Government and refugee-hosting communities, particularly
through community development councils, (CDCs), shuras
and civil society organisations, to promote inclusion and
participation, especially of youth, girls and women, and
to support development through a ‘whole of community’
approach.
Links to development programming
Some 20 UN agencies and NGOs are involved in responding
to the needs of refugees in Afghanistan. The main
governmental counterpart is MoRR at the national level
and DoRR at provincial levels. UNHCR and its partners
continue to strengthen engagement with other line ministries
and departments that have a role in refugee protection.
Collaboration with relevant government counterparts,
development actors and the private sector is underway to
bridge the gap between humanitarian assistance and mediumto
long-term development support for refugees as well as
returnees and IDPs. The Durable Solutions Working Group
(DSWG) – led by MoRR and co-chaired on rotational basis by
UNHCR, UNDP and IOM – promotes sustainable solutions
through inter-agency initiatives, joint and complementary
programmes, as well as targeted advocacy.
The Government has already laid out its vision for national
development in its Mutual Accountability Framework (MAF)
and in the Afghanistan National Peace and Development
Framework (ANPDF). Initiatives have begun toward
integrating the needs of refugees, returnees and IDPs in
national priority programmes across different sectors, with
strategies being developed by respective line ministries. This
will need to be further developed and expanded in 2019
and subsequent years, and UNHCR will continue to engage
through the One-UN framework to ensure refugees have
access to integration programmes and eventual durable
solutions.
COST COMPARISION PER PERSON ASSISTED 2018-21 (US$)
2018 2019 2020 2021
132 176 - -
Roughly $176 will be spent on each refugee assisted in 2019, compared to $132 in
2018. As UNHCR does not yet have an indication of its budget for 2020 and 2021 it
is not possible at this stage to predict any changes in this figure moving forward.
58
PART I: Summar y of needs , targets & re quire ments
Logframe
Participating organisations by sector
Planning figures
Acronyms
References
What if? ...we fail to respond
Guide to giving
PART III: ANNEXES
PART III - ANNEXES: Logframe
59 #
LOGFRAME
Strategic Objective 1 (SO1): Save lives in the areas of highest need
1.1 HEALTH INDICATORS BASELINE TARGET 2019 TARGET 2020 TARGET 2021 MEANS OF VERIFICATION
Outcomes
• People suffering
from conflict-related
trauma injuries receive
life-saving treatment
within the province
where the injury was
sustained.
• % of victims who
receive life-saving
trauma care within the
province where the
injury was sustained.
• # of trauma cases
treated within 24
hours.
• <35 %
• 95,000
• <45%
• 75,000
• <45%
• 80,000
• <<45%
• 90,000
• Compare the number of
cases in the province with the
number of cases treated in
health facilities in the same
province and/or First Aid
Trauma Posts (FATPs)
• Compare admissions with
treatments
Outputs
• Additional FATPs are
accessible to treat
people with traumatic
injuries.
• # of trauma cases
treated through FATPs
(m/w/b/g).
• # of new FATPs
established in highrisk
provinces.
• 110,000
• 20
• 65,000
• 25
• 70,000
• 30
• 80,000
• 35
• Reported number of
beneficiaries from FATPs
and numbers reported from
other health facilities to total
number of beneficiaries
• WHO data
Activities
1. Establishment of FATPs, stabilisation of FATP services and referral of patients in conflicted-affected areas.
2. Provision of out-patient care and consultations
3. Provision of rehabilitation care to trauma-affected patients, including victim of landmines.
4. Provision of psychosocial support for people affected by conflict.
5. Major and minor surgeries.
1.2 HEALTH INDICATORS BASELINE TARGET 2019 TARGET 2020 TARGET 2021 MEANS OF VERIFICATION
Outcomes
• People exposed to
GBV, experiencing
mental health or
psychosocial issues,
and pregnant women
in conflict areas
receive appropriate,
professional support.
• # of health facilities
providing clinical
management of rape
(CMR) to survivors
• N/A • 20 • 20 • 15 • WHO and HMIS data
Outputs
• Health staff can
provide services
according to the
national GBV protocol.
• People with
mental health and
psychosocial problems
access appropriate,
focused care.
• # of women provided
with antenatal care in
high-risk provinces.
• # of health staff trained
on national GBV
protocol
• # of women, men, girls
and boys who receive
focused psychosocial
and psychological care.
• # of women provided
with antenatal care in
high-risk provinces.
• 3,979
• 750,000
• 20,000
• 1,030
• 810,000
• 15,000
• 1,030
• 850,000
• 17,000
• 50
• 800,000
• 20,000
• WHO and HMIS
• HMIS
• Partner reports and HMIS
Activities
1. Provision of training on the national GBV protocol
2. Provision of focused psychosocial and psychological care
3. Provision of antenatal care by trained staff
*This logframe has been revised for 2019 to reflect the current operating environment and improve effective tracking of results/gaps. While
not currently reflected here, indicators and results will be disaggregated by sex, and age as well where available, when clusters report
against these at the end of the first quarter of 2019.
*
PART III - ANNEXES: Logframe
60
1.3 FSAC INDICATORS BASELINE TARGET 2019 TARGET 2020 TARGET 2021 MEANS OF VERIFICATION
Outcomes
• Conflict IDP, returnee,
refugee women, men
and children of all
ages have a minimum
household food
consumption score
above 42.5.
• % of households
with poor food
consumption.
• 35% • <15% • <15% • <15% • Post-distribution monitoring
reports and end line surveys.
Outputs
• Necessary food
assistance is provided
to affected households
in a timely manner.
• Livelihoods are
protected and
rehabilitated for
vulnerable people at
risk of hunger and
malnutrition.
• # of conflict affected
IDP, returnee, refugee
women, men and children
of all ages who
receive adequate food/
cash responses, in a
timely manner.
• # of affected people
receiving in-kind food
assistance.
• # of affected people
receiving cash transfers.
• # of calls related
to food assistance
responded to and resolved
within a week
• # of returnees, women,
men and children
of all ages who receive
adequate livelihoods
responses, in a timely
manner.
• # of drought-affected
people receiving
in-kind livelihoods
assistance
• 800,000
• 500,000
• 300,000
• 811
• N/A
• 287,527
• 591,000
• 216,000
• 375,000
• 100
• 35,000
• 1,440,000
• 62,400
• 209,450
• 352,950
• 100
• 35,000
• 1,054,165
• 533,600
• 202,800
• 330,800
• 100
• 35,000
• 527,082
• Quarterly reports of partners.
• Quarterly reports of partners.
• Quarterly reports of partners.
• AWAAZ Afghanistan
dashboard.
• Quarterly reports of partners.
• Quarterly reports of partners.
Activities
1. Conduct food security and livelihoods needs assessments.
2. Timely provision of food assistance (food, cash-for-food or combination) to meet the immediate needs of affected people (conflict-affected IDPs, returnees and
refugees).
3. Timely provision of emergency livelihoods protection assistance (poultry, kitchen gardening and agriculture inputs) to vulnerable people.
4. Improve cluster coordination and analysis.
PART III - ANNEXES: Logframe
61 #
1.4 NUTRITION INDICATORS BASELINE TARGET 2019 TARGET 2020 TARGET 2021 MEANS OF VERIFICATION
Outcomes
• Decline in GAM among
IDP, returnee, refugee
and non-displaced,
conflict-affected
children under 5 (g/b)
and a decline in PLW
suffering from acute
malnutrition.
• # of IDP, returnee,
refugee and nondisplaced
children
under five with SAM
who are cured.
• # of IDP, returnee,
refugee and nondisplaced
children
under five with MAM
who are cured.
• 200,600
• 201,000
• 232,478
• 250,625
• 267,350
• 250,625
• 307,452
• 250,625
• National Nutrition database,
IMAM reports
• National Nutrition database,
IMAM reports
Outputs
• More boys and girls (6-
59 months) with SAM
and MAM are enrolled
in therapeutic feeding
programmes.
• More PLW are
enrolled in targeted
supplementary feeding
programmes (TSFP)
• # of boys and girls (6-
59 months) with SAM
and MAM enrolled in
therapeutic feeding
programmes.
• # of PLW with acute
malnutrition enrolled
in TSFP.
• # of BPHS clinics
supplied with readyto-
use therapeutic
foods (RUTF) over 12
months.
• 504,000
• 145,335
• 1,193
• 607,671
• 128,159
• 1,200
• 648,697
• 128,159
• 1,380
• 695,875
• 128,159
• 1,380
• National Nutrition database,
IMAM reports
• National Nutrition database,
IMAM reports
• National Nutrition database,
IMAM reports
Activities
1. Out-patient and in-patient treatment of SAM children under five years
2. Treatment of MAM children aged 6-59 months
3. Out-patient and in-patient treatment of SAM children under five years, and treatment of MAM children aged 6-59 months
4. Targeted supplementary feeding for PLW
5. Out-patient treatment of SAM children under five years
1.5 WASH INDICATORS BASELINE TARGET 2019 TARGET 2020 TARGET 2021 MEANS OF VERIFICATION
Outcomes
• Affected people have
access to the water and
sanitation services and
facilities they need.
• # of affected people
receiving water
assistance as per
cluster standard.
• # of affected people
with access to
functioning and
gender-segregated
sanitation facilities
• 400,000
• 200,000
• 1,100,000
• 450,000
• 700,000
• 350,000
• 500,000
• 300,000
• WASH cluster reports,
partners reports
• WASH cluster reports,
partners reports
Outputs
• Necessary hygiene
assistance is
provided to affected
communities and
people in a timely
manner.
• # of affected people
receiving hygiene
promotion as per cluster
standard.
• # of affected people
receiving hygiene kits
as per cluster standard.
• 550,000
• 250,000
• 1,200,000
• 400,000
• 800,000
• 350,000
• 700,000
• 300,000
• WASH cluster reports,
partners reports
• WASH cluster reports,
partners reports
PART III - ANNEXES: Logframe
62
1.5 WASH INDICATORS BASELINE TARGET 2019 TARGET 2020 TARGET 2021 MEANS OF VERIFICATION
Activities
1. Provision of emergency sanitation and bathing facilities to displaced families close to their settlements.
2. Provision of safe drinking water by tankering, rehabilitation of existing water system or the installation of new infrastructure.
3. Provision of safe water by supplying water treatment chemicals and training on their use (incl provision of water kits).
4. Hygiene promotion activities with a focus on the importance of handwashing with soap at critical times and proper use of toilets by emergency-affected people.
5. Distribution of Family Hygiene Kits to the affected population (especially families displaced due to conflict or drought)
6. Carry-out rapid needs assessment of the affected population/communities to determine the WASH assistance to be provided.
7. Monitoring of and reporting on the WASH response including identification of gaps and implementation of measures to overcome them
1.6 ES-NFI INDICATORS BASELINE TARGET 2019 TARGET 2020 TARGET 2021 MEANS OF VERIFICATION
Outcomes
• IDP, returnee, refugee
and non-displaced
conflict-affected
women, men and
children of all ages
are protected from the
elements through safe
emergency shelter
interventions which
reduce the likelihood
of disease and death.
• Proportion of IDP,
returnee and nondisplaced
conflictaffected
women, men
and children of all
ages receiving shelter
assistance who express
satisfaction about this
support.
• 80% • 100% • 100% • 100% • PDM reports
Outputs
• Necessary ESNFI
assistance is
provided to affected
communities and
people in a timely
manner.
• # of people receiving
emergency shelter
assistance, including
through cash-for-rent
support.
• # of people receiving
the winterisation
standard package for
insulation.
• # of people receiving
basic household items
(NFI) to meet their
immediate needs.
• # of people whose
shelter was upgraded,
allowing for safer and
more dignified living
conditions.
• Estimated % of PiN
covered with the
ES-NFI stocks that
are pre-positioned in
strategic locations.
• 48,119
• 16,145
• 440,641
• 29,109
• N/A
• 208,980
• 332,604
• 766,238
• 66,144
• 75%
• 177,633
• 282,713
• 651,302
• 58,772
• 75%
• 167,184
• 266,083
• 612,990
• 55,315
• 75%
• ES-NFI cluster monitoring
reports, ReportHub
• ES-NFI Cluster monitoring
reports, ReportHub
• ES-NFI Cluster monitoring
reports, ReportHub
• ES-NFI Cluster monitoring
reports, ReportHub
• Stock analysis report,
ReportHub
PART III - ANNEXES: Logframe
63 #
1.6 ES-NFI INDICATORS BASELINE TARGET 2019 TARGET 2020 TARGET 2021 MEANS OF VERIFICATION
Activities
1. Conduct joint assessments to identify humanitarian needs and improve targeting.
2. Improve communication with communities on shelter programmes.
3. Distribute emergency shelter (tents and tarpaulins) to people in need, as identified by needs assessments.
4. Provide cash-for-rent support where appropriate.
5. Distribute winterisation package.
6. Upgrade shelters allowing for safer and more dignified living conditions.
7. Conduct post-distribution monitoring.
1.7 PROTECTION INDICATORS BASELINE TARGET 2019 TARGET 2020 TARGET 2021 MEANS OF VERIFICATION
Outcomes
• The incidence of death
and injury among
IDP, returnee and
non-displaced, conflictaffected
women, men
and children of all
ages from mines and
Explosive Remants of
War (ERW) is reduced.
• % reduction in victims
from mines and ERW,
compared to the same
time last year
• 582 • 5-10% • 5-10% • 5-10% • Information Management
System for Mine Action
(IMSMA) database and
UNAMA Reports on
Protection of Civilians in
Armed Conflict
Outputs
• Land is cleared of
known explosive
hazards.
• MRE programmes are
provided to vulnerable
populations affected by
the conflict.
• Conflict-affected
communities are
searched for explosive
hazards
• # of people living
within one kilometre
of a known explosive
hazard benefitting
from the removal
of those explosive
hazards.
• Square metres of area
cleared from known
explosive hazards
• # of IDPs, returnees
and non-displaced
conflict-affected people
receiving MRE.
• Number of conflictaffected
communities
visited by crossedtrained
teams for EOD,
survey and Mine/ERW
risk education.
• N/A
• N/A
• 462,476
• 250
• 130,303
• 5,094,917
• 409,047
• 280
• 130,303
• 5,094,917
• 409,047
• 280
• 130,303
• 5,094,917
• 409,047
• 280
• Information Management
System for Mine Action
(IMSMA) database
• Information Management
System for Mine Action
(IMSMA) database
• Information Management
System for Mine Action
(IMSMA) database
• Information Management
System for Mine Action
(IMSMA) database
Activities
1. Provision of Mine/ERW risk education including for returnees at UNHCR Encashment Centres and IOM Transit Centres, as well as to affected communities
2. Carry out mine/ERW clearance operations – including EOD
3. Improve community awareness of ERW risks
4. Advocacy on ERW risks
5. Carry-out technical and non-technical surveys of hazards
6. Distribution of mine/ERW risk education materials
7. Dissemination of Mine/ERW risk education through mass media (TV and Radio)
PART III - ANNEXES: Logframe
64
1.8 MPC INDICATORS BASELINE TARGET 2019 TARGET 2020 TARGET 2021 MEANS OF VERIFICATION
Outcomes
• Recent conflict-IDPs
and returnees are
able to meet their
basic needs in the first
phase of displacement,
without having to
resort to severe
negative coping
strategies.
• % of households who
receive MPC assistance
who have medium or
low reduced coping
score (as measured by
the reduced Coping
Strategies Index - rCSI).
• 84% • 85% • 85% • 85% • Inter-cluster cash PDM results
Outputs
• Vulnerable, recent
conflict-IDPs are
provided with timely
multi-purpose cash
grants to meet their
basic needs.
• Vulnerable,
undocumented
returnees from Iran
and Pakistan are
provided with IOM
multi-purpose cash
grants upon arrival, to
meet their transport
and NFI needs.
• # of recent conflict
IDPs in need who
receive multi-purpose
cash grants to cover
their basic emergency
requirements.
• # of returnees from
Iran or Pakistan who
receive multi-purpose
cash grants upon
arrival to cover their
transport and NFI
needs.
• 200,000
• 42,577
• 350,000
• 163,000
• 315,000
• 165,247
• 280,000
• 167,509
• ReportHub
• ReportHub
Activities
1. Provision of timely multi-purpose cash grants to vulnerable recent conflict-induced IDPs
2. Provision of timely multi-purpose cash grants to undocumented returnees upon arrival
1.9 MULTI-SECTOR INDICATORS BASELINE TARGET 2019 TARGET 2020 TARGET 2021 MEANS OF VERIFICATION
Outcomes
• WASH, shelter, health
and food security
assistance is delivered
to IDP women, men,
boys and girls living
in hard-to-reach (HTR)
areas.
• Total # of HTR districts
where IDPs have
received assistance.
• # of HTR districts where
IDPs have received
health assistance.
• # of HTR districts where
IDPs have received
WASH assistance
• # of HTR districts where
IDPs and vulnerable
affected people
have received ES-NFI
assistance.
• # of HTR districts where
IDPs have received
FSAC assistance (food
or livelihoods)
• 84
• 100
• 20
• 25
• 15
• 86
• 25
• 25
• 44
• 100
• 88
• 35
• 25
• 44
• 100
• 90
• 40
• 25
• 44
• 100
• Cluster reporting
• Number of people reached
with health services with the
total number of IDPs
• WASH cluster reports,
partners reports
• ReportHub data, ES/NFI
monitoring reports
• Quarterly reports of partners.
PART III - ANNEXES: Logframe
65 #
1.9 MULTI-SECTOR INDICATORS BASELINE TARGET 2019 TARGET 2020 TARGET 2021 MEANS OF VERIFICATION
Outputs
• The humanitarian
system facilitates a
timely and effective
response to people in
need.
• # of IDPs in HTR
districts receiving
emergency health
services from MHTs.
• # of MHTs deployed
to areas where fixed
health facilities have
been closed.
• # of IDPs in HTR
districts receiving
WASH assistance.
• # of IDPs and
vulnerable affected
people in HTR
districts receiving NFI,
emergency shelter
or cash-for-rent
assistance.
• Total # of IDPs in HTR
districts receiving
WASH, food,
emergency shelter,
SMEB and cash-or-rent
assistance.
• 195,000
• 41
• 100,000
• 75,401
• 282,000
• 210,000
• 40
• 250,000
• 229,871
• 300,000
• 220,000
• 45
• 200,000
• 195,391
• 320,000
• 225,000
• 50
• 150,000
• 183,897
• 340,000
• Number of people reached
with health services against
the total number of IDPs and
number of MHT
• Attacks on health facilities
database and ReportHub
• WASH cluster reports,
partners reports
• ReportHub data
• Cluster reporting
Activities
1. Emergency health provision by MHTs in hard-to-reach districts.
2. Provision of safe drinking water by tankering, rehabilitation of existing systems or installation of new infrastructure.
3. Provision of safe water by supplying water treatment chemicals and training on their use (including provision of water kits).
4. Distribution of in-kind food, cash-for-food, livelihoods support and agricultural inputs
5. Provision of emergency shelter and other NFI (tents and tarpaulins), as well as cash-for-rent support where appropriate
6. Conduct emergency needs assessments and post-distribution monitoring to identify gaps and get community feedback
Strategic Objective 2 (SO2): Protection violations are reduced and increase respect for International
Humanitarian Law
2.1 PROTECTION INDICATORS BASELINE TARGET 2019 TARGET 2020 TARGET 2021 MEANS OF VERIFICATION
Outcomes
• Impact of armed
conflict and natural
disasters on civilians
and civilian facilities is
reduced.
• % reduction in civilian
casualties compared to
the same period of the
previous year.
• 10,453
in 2017
- 3,438
deaths
& 7,015
injured.
(To be
updated
when
2018
full year
data is
available).
• 10% • 15% • 20% • UNAMA Protection of
Civilians in Armed Conflict
quarterly reports
PART III - ANNEXES: Logframe
66
2.1 PROTECTION INDICATORS BASELINE TARGET 2019 TARGET 2020 TARGET 2021 MEANS OF VERIFICATION
Outputs
• Humanitarian
negotiation and
advocacy initiatives are
conducted with parties
to the conflict in order
to enhance the level
of respect for IHL and
IHRL.
• Enhanced protection
analysis of the
environment.
• # of conflict-affected
schools and healthcare
facilities that have been
re-opened following a
military presence, as
a result of protection
negotiation and
advocacy.
• # protection monitoring
visits conducted
countrywide.
• # people reached
through protection
monitoring visits.
• N/A
• 382
• 252,327
• 100
• 400
• 252,327
• 140
• 450
• 201,862
• 180
• 500
• 176,629
• MRM reports, UNAMA
reports, PIMS and Protection
Monitoring reports, Health
cluster IMS
• Protection Monitoring, PIMS
• Protection Monitoring, PIMS
Activities
1. Conduct protection needs assessments and monitoring missions
2. Carry-out protection monitoring (UNAMA PoC monitoring, PIMS).
3. Train and sensitise actors, communities and authorities on IHL, particularly with regard to schools and health facilities and protection outcomes.
4. Conduct advocacy with authorities, humanitarian actors and parties to the conflict on IHL.
5. Capacity-building of partners and community leaders on protection of civilians issues.
6. Development of community-based early warning and contingency plans
7. Support for negotiation of safe passage of civilians
8. Security upgrades for schools and clinics
2.2 PROTECTION INDICATORS BASELINE TARGET 2019 TARGET 2020 TARGET 2021 MEANS OF VERIFICATION
Outcomes
• An appropriate,
coordinated
response provides
necessary protection
assistance to affected
communities and
people, including
children, in a timely
manner.
• # of at-risk IDP, returnee
and non-displaced
conflict or natural
disaster-affected
GBV survivors
receiving multisectoral
assistance
(psychosocial, legal,
safety, health and
dignity kits).
• 375,575 • 235,722 • 410,250 • 407,716 • Sub-cluster reporting
PART III - ANNEXES: Logframe
67 #
2.2 PROTECTION INDICATORS BASELINE TARGET 2019 TARGET 2020 TARGET 2021 MEANS OF VERIFICATION
Outputs
• Increased community
awareness of and
capacity to respond
to GBV.
• Boys and girls affected
by humanitarian crises
are provided with
psychosocial support
and structured play
through child-friendly
spaces in order to
acquire the basic social
and communication
skills they need.
• Boys and girls affected
by humanitarian crises
benefit from age and
gender-sensitive case
management services.
• # of community
members mobilised
through community
dialogues to prevent
and respond to GBV.
• # of targeted girls and
boys benefiting from
age- and gendersensitive
psychosocial
support activities.
• # of targeted girls
and boys benefiting
from age- and
gender-sensitive case
management services.
• 128,924
• 143,555
• 6,744
• 226,784
• 82,451
• 413,594
• 100,000
• 11,000
• 423,980
• 90,000
• 10,000
• Sub-cluster reporting
• Monthly reports from
Implementing partners
• Monthly reports from
Implementing partners
Activities
1. Provision of survivor-centred psychosocial, health, safety and legal/justice services including distribution of dignity kits through women-friendly health spaces,
family protection centres, psychosocial outreach teams and referrals for response services.
2. Mobilisation of communities to raise awareness on GBV-related issues and impacts through community dialogues with men, boys, religious leaders and
community elders.
3. Build capacity and train health workers on appropriate GBV response.
4. Identify, register and provide family tracing and reunification services for unaccompanied and separated children
5. Provide case management and referrals to the most vulnerable children in need
6. Provide psychosocial support and victim assistance to children, particularly those affected by conflict
7. Train child protection specialists on the norms and standards of child protection
8. Advocate against and respond to cases of child recruitment
9. Carry-out community-based awareness raising on child protection issues
2.3 PROTECTION INDICATORS BASELINE TARGET 2019 TARGET 2020 TARGET 2021 MEANS OF VERIFICATION
Outcomes
• Displacement-affected
communities are able
to claim HLP rights
and possess legal
identity, including civil
documentation (LCD).
• % of people receiving
HLP services who report
that they have civil
documentation.
• % of people who
received HLP support
(awareness raising,
advocacy and legal
counselling) who then
went on to access land,
security of tenure,
adequate housing or
civil documentation,
in line with their legal
rights.
• 80%
• 74%
• 80%
• 75%
• 80%
• 75%
• 80%
• 75%
• NRC - ICLA database,
internal/external evaluations
• NRC - ICLA database,
internal/external evaluations
PART III - ANNEXES: Logframe
68
2.3 PROTECTION INDICATORS BASELINE TARGET 2019 TARGET 2020 TARGET 2021 MEANS OF VERIFICATION
Outputs
• Displacementaffected
communities
receive information,
counselling and legal
assistance on HLP and
LCD rights.
• # of individuals
receiving information
on HLP and LCD rights.
• # of individual receiving
counselling and legal
assistance on HLP and
LCD rights.
• # of displaced people
with improved access
to land and security of
tenure as a result of
humanitarian activities.
• 28,639
• 26,244
• 14,930
• 45,531
• 25,170
• 14,937
• 40,000
• 25,000
• 15,000
• 40,000
• 20,000
• 15,000
• NRC - ICLA database,
internal/external evaluations
• NRC - ICLA database,
internal/external evaluations
• NRC - ICLA database,
internal/external evaluations
Activities
1. Information-sharing, individual counselling, and individual legal assistance on HLP/LCD issues for people in need.
2. Information sharing, individual counselling, individual legal assistance, advocacy and capacity-building for duty-bearers about HLP/LCD rights.
3. Community sensitisation, information sessions, and individual counselling.
4. Train displaced people on HLP rights and provide advice to decision-makers on HLP/LCD principles.
2.4 EDUCATION INDICATORS BASELINE TARGET 2019 TARGET 2020 TARGET 2021 MEANS OF VERIFICATION
Outcomes
• School-aged girls
and boys affected
by emergencies can
access quality, basic
education.
• # of school-aged girls
and boys affected by
emergencies have
access to quality, basic
education.*
• 147,718 • 349,372 • 255,331 • 256,055 • EiEWG 5Ws data and
snapshot, student
enrolment numbers from
government schools
Outputs
• Formal and/or
non-formal quality
learning opportunities
are provided for
emergency-affected,
school-aged children.
• # of TLS (CBE, ALC,
TLS) established and
maintained.
• # of school-aged
children (b/g)
benefitting from
teaching and learning
materials (student kits,
teaching kits, classroom
kits).
• # of teachers (f/m)
recruited.
• # of teachers (f/m)
trained on EiE.
• # of community
members (including
school management
shuras) sensitised on
the importance of EiE.
• 4,924
• 147,718
• 2,736
• 6,567
• 6,884
• 11,646
• 349,372
• 11,646
• 15,000
• 11,646
• 8,511
• 255,331
• 8,511
• 10,950.00
• 8,511
• 8,535
• 256,055
• 8,535
• 11,000
• 8,535
• EiEWG 5Ws data and
monthly snapshot
• EiEWG 5Ws data and
monthly snapshot
• EiEWG 5Ws data and
monthly snapshot
• EiEWG 5Ws data and
monthly snapshot
• EiEWG 5Ws data and
monthly snapshot
Activities
1. Establish TLS (tents and/or community-based education, accelerated learning classes).
2. Provide learning kits for students, teaching kits for teachers and classroom kits for each class
3. Recruit female and male teachers to run classes
4. Provide teacher training using the EiE harmonised teacher training package
5. Provide trainings for school management shura members in the target areas
6. Enrol children in CBE, ALC or formal schools. This will include extra-curricular activities such as language and catch-up classes if not counted as part of TLS.
*This includes extra-curricular classes including language, catch-up and PSS etc if not part of TLS.
PART III - ANNEXES: Logframe
69 #
Strategic Objective 3 (SO3): People struck by sudden- and slow-onset crises get timely assistance
3.1 MULTI-SECTOR INDICATORS BASELINE TARGET 2019 TARGET 2020 TARGET 2021 MEANS OF VERIFICATION
Outcomes
• People affected by
natural disasters,
including severe
weather conditions,
receive timely
assistance, preventing
loss of life and
minimising the risk of
disease.
• # of people affected by
natural disasters who
received assistance.
• 2,692,000 • 3,360,000 • 159,000,000 • 850,000 • Cluster reporting
Outputs
• Disaster-affected and
disaster-displaced
people are provided
with the food and
livelihoods assistance
they need.
• Disaster-affected and
disaster-displaced
people are provided
with the WASH
support they need.
• There is an effective
and timely emergency
response to suddenonset
disasters.
• Total # of disasteraffected
and disasterdisplaced
people
(sudden and slowonset)
receiving any
type of food assistance.
• # of disaster-affected
and disaster-displaced
people (sudden
and slow-onset)
receiving cash-for-food
assistance.
• # of disaster-affected
and disaster-displaced
people (sudden and
slow-onset) receiving
in-kind food assistance.
• Overall # of disasteraffected
people
receiving any kind of
emergency livelihoods
assistance.
• # of disaster-affected
people receiving
cash-based emergency
livelihoods assistance.
• # of disaster-affected
people receiving
in-kind emergency
livelihoods assistance.
• # of natural disasteraffected
people
receiving WASH
assistance.
• Total # of sudden-onset
disaster-affected people
receiving WASH, Food,
and SMEB assistance.
• 1,355,282
• 178,000
• 1,177,282
• 108,353
• 0
• 108,353
• 50,000
• 68,000
• 3,352,016
• 335,202
• 3,016,814
• 1,782,500
• 171,250
• 1,611,250
• 250,000
• 117,000
• 1,579,619
• 157,962
• 1,421,657
• 1,356,796
• 135,680
• 1,221,116
• 100,000
• 120,000
• 851,309
• 85,131
• 766,178
• 774,898
• 77,490
• 697,408
• 100,000
• 124,000
• Quarterly reports of partners.
• Quarterly reports of partners.
• Quarterly reports of partners.
• Quarterly reports of partners.
• Quarterly reports of partners.
• Quarterly reports of partners.
• WASH cluster reports, partner
reports
• Cluster reporting
PART III - ANNEXES: Logframe
70
3.1 MULTI-SECTOR INDICATORS BASELINE TARGET 2019 TARGET 2020 TARGET 2021 MEANS OF VERIFICATION
Activities
1. Conduct timely multi-sectoral assessments to identify people in need and deliver assistance to people affected by natural disasters.
2. Distribution of in-kind food, cash-for-food, emergency livelihoods, WASH, emergency shelter and NFI support/services.
3. Analysis of country-wide stocks to identify gaps.
4. Arrange warehouse facilities and transport stocks in strategic locations as per gaps identified.
5. Monitoring of seasonal weather forecasts so that partners are prepared to act in affected areas.
6. Integrated cross-sectoral programming is pursued wherever possible to ensure a holistic response to the full range of people’s needs.
7. Contingency and response planning is carried out through the ICCT at the national and sub-national level.
3.2 COORDINATION INDICATORS BASELINE TARGET 2019 TARGET 2020 TARGET 2021 MEANS OF VERIFICATION
Outcomes
• The coordination
structure is fit for
purpose and facilitates
a timely and effective
response to people in
need.
• # of IASC-led peerto-
peer reviews of
the humanitarian
architecture completed
in Afghanistan.
• 0 • 1 • 0 • 0 • Peer-to-peer mission report
Outputs
• The annual HNO is
evidence-based with
data drawn from a
range of coordinated,
inter-sectoral needs
assessments which
accurately identify
people in need.
• Decision-makers
have access to robust
and rigorous data on
internal and crossborder
population
movements, needs,
response and gaps
enabling them to
make informed
funding and
programme decisions.
• Needs, response and
gap overviews are
carried-out regularly
by the clusters and
the ICCT to inform
strategic decisionmaking
and funding
decisions.
• # of provinces
where baseline
mobility community
assessments were
conducted.
• # of rapid (HEAT)
assessments completed
in relation to displaced
populations.
• # of sector-specific
and inter-sectoral
needs assessments
completed.
• # of households
assessed as part
of the annual WoA
Assessment
• # of cluster reports on
needs, response and
gaps provided to the
HCT per year
• 15
• 481
• 107
• 22,135
• 4
• 34
• 700
• 164
• 26,000
• 4
• 34
• 700
• 164
• 26,000
• 4
• 34
• 700
• 164
• 26,000
• 4
• Cluster reporting.
• Assessments published on
Humanitarian Response
or shared with partners as
relevant.
• Assessments published on
Humanitarian Response
or shared with partners as
relevant.
• Assessment report is
published and data is
reflected in the HNO.
• Periodic monitoring reports
are published.
Activities
1. Conduct joint assessments to identify humanitarian needs, improve targeting and identify service gaps in hard-to-reach areas
2. Conduct post-distribution monitoring
3. Improve community engagement through regular beneficary perception surveys
4. Questionnaires devised and assessments carried-out in collaboration with the Humanitarian Coordinated Assessment Working Group (HCAWG)
5. Information management support to track and communicate needs, response and gaps
6. Analysis of country-wide stocks and gaps, as well as arrangement of warehousing
7. Peer-to-peer mission takes place, a report is produced and recommendations are implemented
PART III - ANNEXES: Planning figures: People to be assisted
71 #
0.2M
0.3M
0.4M
0.6M
0.5M
0.3M
0.6M
1.7M
4.5M
67 | 19 | 14%
59 | 21 | 21%
61 | 21 | 18%
59 | 21 | 20%
59 | 21 | 20%
75 | 15 | 10%
59 | 20 | 21%
58 | 21 | 21%
60 | 20 | 20%
CAPITAL
CENTRAL
HIGHLAND
EASTERN
NORTH
EASTERN
NORTHERN
SOUTH
EASTERN
SOUTHERN
WESTERN
Conflict
affected
Access to
basic
services
Conflict
displaced
Natural
disaster
displaced
Afghan
returnees 2
Pakistani
refugees
Sudden
onset
% children,
women,
men1
Total 2
CONFLICT POPULATION MOVEMENT NATURAL DISASTERS ACCESS BY SEX & AGE TOTAL
Slow
onset
PEOPLE TO
BE ASSISTED
1.Children (<18 years old), women, men (adults >18 years old)
2. The overall total for returnees is not the sum of returnees in need across the region, as there is
an overlap between the returnees at the border and at the place of return.
0.07M 0.02M - 0.04M - 0.01M 0.004M 0.10M
0.01M 0.002M - 0.001M - 0.002M 0.33M 0.05M
0.11M 0.06M - 0.05M - 0.01M 0.18M 0.11M
0.04M 0.08M - 0.02M - 0.02M 0.47M 0.21M
0.04M 0.05M - 0.01M - 0.03M 0.40M 0.16M
0.05M 0.02M - 0.01M 0.05M 0.00M - 0.17M
0.11M 0.05M 0.002M 0.08M - 0.01M 0.33M 0.32M
0.07M 0.06M 0.30M 0.07M - 0.02M 1.23M 0.19M
0.50M 0.35M 0.30M 0.21M 0.05M 0.11M 2.94M 1.31M
PLANNING FIGURES: PEOPLE TO BE ASSISTED
BY REGION (2019)
PART III - ANNEXES: Planning figures : People to be assisted (2020)
72
PLANNING FIGURES: PEOPLE TO BE ASSISTED (2020)
PEOPLE IN NEED
4.3M
REQUIREMENTS (US$)
466M
PEOPLE TO BE ASSISTED
3M
*Children (<18 years old), men, women (adults, >18 years). **Total figure is not the total of the column, as the same people may appear several times. ***Total also includes UNHAS & Coordination.
BREAKDOWN OF PEOPLE TO BE ASSISTED
100 | 0 | 0%
62 | 19 | 19%
59 | 20 | 21%
59 | 20 | 21%
79 | 21 | 0%
71 | 16 | 13%
59 | 20 | 21%
59 | 20 | 21%
60 | 20 | 20%
0.4M
4.1M
-
-
-
4.3M
-
-
8.8M
25.7M
41.7M
161.8M
58.5M
57.6M
33.9M
27.2M
22.3M
***465.5
0.4M
0.6M
2.6M
1.8M
2.1M
1.9M
1.5M
-
4.3M**
0.11M 0.05M - 0.03M 0.02M 0.03M - 0.06M
- 0.27M - 0.06M 0.05M 0.08M - -
- 0.32M - 0.21M 0.04M 0.12M 1.46M -
0.26M 0.09M - 0.08M 0.02M 0.01M 0.17M 1.02M
- 0.08M - 0.05M 0.01M 0.03M - 0.75M
0.34M 0.12M - 0.05M 0.02M 0.02M 0.28M -
- 0.27M - 0.14M 0.04M 0.10M 0.08M 0.22M
- 0.32M - 0.17M - - - -
0.41M 0.32M - 0.22M 0.05M 0.12M 1.47M 1.57M
0.3M
0.5M
2.1M
1.8M
0.9M
0.8M
0.9M
0.5M
3M**
EiE
ES-NFI
Food Security
Health
Nutrition
Protection
WASH
MP Cash
TOTAL
Access to
basic
services
Refugee
chapter
Total
(US$)
% children,
women,
men*
TOTAL CONFLICT POPULATION MOVEMENT DISASTERS ACCESS SEX & AGE REQUIREMENTS
People
to be
assisted
People in need Conflict
affected
Conflict
displaced
Natural
disaster
displaced
Afghan
returnees
Pakistani
refugees
Sudden
onset
Slow
onset
PEOPLE IN NEED, PEOPLE TO RECEIVE ASSISTANCE AND FINANCIAL REQUIREMENTS FOR 2020
PART III - ANNEXES: Planning figures : People TO BE ASSISTED (2021)
73 #
PEOPLE IN NEED
3.7M
REQUIREMENTS (US$)
395M
PEOPLE TO BE ASSISTED
2.4M
*Children (<18 years old), men, women (adults, >18 years). **Total figure is not the total of the column, as the same people may appear several times. ***Total also includes UNHAS & Coordination.
BREAKDOWN OF PEOPLE TO BE ASSISTED
100 | 0 | 0%
62 | 19 | 19%
59 | 20 | 21%
59 | 20 | 21%
80 | 20 | 0%
70 | 16 | 14%
59 | 20 | 21%
59 | 20 | 21%
62 | 19 | 19%
0.4M
4.1M
-
-
-
4.3M
-
-
8.8M
25.8M
39.5M
104.1M
54.4M
58.9M
29.1M
25.5M
20.6M
***394.9
0.3M
0.6M
1.6M
1.7M
2.2M
1.7M
1.3M
-
3.7M**
0.11M 0.05M - 0.03M 0.02M 0.03M - 0.06M
- 0.27M - 0.06M 0.05M 0.08M - -
- 0.28M - 0.21M 0.04M 0.12M 0.73M -
0.27M 0.08M - 0.08M 0.02M 0.01M 0.04M 1.24M
- 0.07M - 0.05M 0.01M 0.03M - 0.77M
0.34M 0.12M - 0.04M 0.02M 0.02M 0.24M -
- 0.24M - 0.15M 0.04M 0.11M - 0.19M
- 0.28M - 0.17M - - - -
0.42M 0.28M - 0.22M 0.05M 0.12M 0.73M 1.61M
0.3M
0.5M
1.4M
1.7M
0.9M
0.8M
0.7M
0.4M
2.4M**
EiE
ES-NFI
Food Security
Health
Nutrition
Protection
WASH
MP Cash
TOTAL
Access to
basic
services
Refugee
chapter
Total
(US$)
% children,
women,
men*
TOTAL CONFLICT POPULATION MOVEMENT DISASTERS ACCESS SEX & AGE REQUIREMENTS
People
to be
assisted
People in need Conflict
affected
Conflict
displaced
Natural
disaster
displaced
Afghan
returnees
Pakistani
refugees
Sudden
onset
Slow
onset
PEOPLE IN NEED, PEOPLE TO RECEIVE ASSISTANCE AND FINANCIAL REQUIREMENTS FOR 2021
PLANNING FIGURES: PEOPLE TO BE ASSISTED (2021)
PART III - ANNEXES: Participatin g Organisati ons by Sect or
74
PARTICIPATING ORGANISATIONS BY SECTOR
Education in
Emergencies
AWEC, COAR, INTERSOS, IRC, NRC, SCA, SCI, UNICEF, WADAN, WC-CANADA, WC-UK, WVI 12
Emergency
Shelter and Non-
Food Items
ACF, ACTED, ADRA, AFGHAN AID, AIESO, ARCS, CARE, CARITAS GERMANY, CHRISTIAN AID, CoAR, CONCERN,
CORDAID, CRDSA, DRC, FOCUS, HI, HRDA, IFRC, IMC, IMMAP, IOM, IRC, ISLAMIC RELIEF, MISSION EAST, NAC, NCA,
NCRO, NOMAD CONCEPT GROUP (PRIVATE SECTOR), NRC, PIN, PU-AMI, QRCS, REACH, RELIEF INT, SAMUEL HALL,
SCI, SHELTER FOR LIFE, SOLIDARITE INT, UN-HABITAT, UNHCR, UNICEF, WC, WHH, WSTA, ZOA
45
Food Security
and Agriculture
ACF, ACTED, AFGHANAID, ANCC, AOAD, APA, AREA, CARE, CARITAS-G, CD, CHA, COAR, CORDAID, CRS, DRC, FAO, FGA,
HRDA, IRC, JOHANNITER, MADERA, ME, MEDAIR, NAC, NCRO, NEI, NRC, OHW, ORCD, OXFAM, PAC, PIN, RI, SAMUEL
HALL, SCI, SOFAR, WFP, WHH, WVA, ZOA
40
Health AADA, ACF, ACTD, AHDS, ARCS, BARAN, BDN, CARE, CHA, DAO, EMERGENCY, HADAAF, HEWAD, HI, HN-TPO, IMC,
IMMAP, INTERSOS, IOM, JOHANNITER, MEDAIR, MMRCA, MRCA, OHPM, ORCD, PU-AMI, RI, SAF, SAVE THE
CHILDREN, SDO, TERRES DES HOMMES, UNFPA, UNICEF, WHO, WORLD VISION, YHDO
36
Nutrition AADA, ACF, AHDS, AKF, AKHS, ARCS, AYSO, BARAN, BDN, BRAC, CAF, CAI, CHA, CORDAID, HEWAD, HN-TPO, HNTPO,
IMC, MEDAIR, MMRCA, MOPH, MOVE, MRCA, OCCD, OHDP, OHPM, OHPM, ORCD, PU- AMI, SAF, SCA, SHRO, TIKA,
UNICEF, WFP, WHO, WV
38
Protection AADA, ACBAR, ACF, ACTED, ACTED, ACTIONAID, ADA, AHDAA, AHDS, AHEAD, ANCC, ARCS, ATVO, AWEC, AYSO, BARAN,
CHRISTIANAID, CIC, CORDAID, DACAAR, DANISH PEOPLE'S AID, DRC, EPD, HEALTHNET TPO, HRDA, IMC, IOM, IRC,
MADERA, MEDAIR, NCA, NCRO, NCRO, NPO/RRAA, NRC, OHPM, OHW, ORD, OXFAM, PACO, PIN, PUI, RRAA, SC
NETHERLANDS, SDO, SHPOUL, SI, TDH, THE JOHANNITER, TLO, TURQUOISE MOUNTAIN TRUST, UNAMA, UNFPA,
UNHABITAT, UNHCR, UNICEF, UNMAS, WC-UK, WCC, WFP, WHH, WVI, YHDO, ZOA
64
Water, Sanitation
and Hygiene
ACBAR, ACF, ACTED, ADA, AHDAA, APA, ARCS, CARITAS- G, CHRISTAIN AID, COAR, CRDSA, DACAAR, HAPA, HRDA,
ICRC, IMC, INTERSOS, IOM, IRC, IRC, MADERA, MEDAIR, MERCY CROPS, MISSION EAST, MRRD, NCA, NCRO, NPO/
RRAA, NRC, OXFAM, RI, SAVE THE CHILDREN, SDO, SI, UNHCR, UNICEF, WHH, WHO, WVI, ZOA
40
Multi-Purpose
Cash
ACF, ACTED, CARE, CORDAID, DRC, IOM, IRC, MEDAIR, NRC, ORD, OXFAM, PIN, SI 13
Refugee Chapter ACTD, APA, CARE, COAR, DACAAR, ICRC, INSO-SE, IRC, MADERA, MORR, MSF, NRC, O-HASA, OHPM, ORCD, SI, TLO,
UNHCR, UNICEF, WFP
20
PART III - ANNEXES: Acronyms
75 #
ACRONYMS
AADA Agency for Assistance and Development of Afghanistan
AAP Accountability to Affected Populations
ACBAR Agency Coordinating Body for Afghan Relief &
Development
ACF Action contre la Faim/Action Against Hunger
ACTD Afghanistan Center for Training and Development
ACTED Agency for Technical Cooperation and Development
ADA Afghanistan Development Association
ADRA Adventist Development and Relief Agency
AFN Afghani (currency)
AHDAA Agency For Humanitarian and Development Assistance
For Afghanistan
AHDS Afghan Health & Development Services
AHEAD Assistance for Health Education and Development
AHF Afghanistan Humanitarian Fund
AIESO Afghanistan Independent Educational and Services
Organization
AKF Aga Khan Foundation
ALC Accelerated Learning Class
ANCC Afghanistan National Re-Construction Co-ordination
ANDMA Afghanistan National Disaster Management Authority
ANPDF Afghanistan National Peace and Development
Framework
AOAD Accessibility Organization for Afghan Disable
APA Afghan Planning Agency
APAPPS Afghanistan-Pakistan Action Plan for Peace and Stability
ARCS Afghan Red Crescent Society
AREA Agency for Rehabilitation & Energy-Conservation in
Afghanistan
ATVO Afghanistan Technical Vocational Organisation
AWEC Afghan Women’s Educational Center
AWEC Afghan Woman’s Education Center
AYSO Afghan Youth Service Organization
BARAN B u Ali Rehabilitation and Aid Network
BDN B akther Development Network
BHC B asic Health Centre
BPHS B asic Package of Health Services
BSFP B lanket Supplementary Feeding Programme
CAF Care of Afghan Familie
CAI Comfort Aid International
CARE Cooperative for Assistance and Relief Everywhere
Caritas G Caritas Germany
CBE Community-Based Education
CBPF Country-Based Pooled Fund
CCNPP Citizens’ Charter National Priority Programme
CDC Community Development Council
CERF Central Emergency Response Fund
CEWG Community Engagement Working Group
CHA Coordination of Humanitarian Assistance
CIC Children in Crisis
CMR Clinical+E18 Management of Rape
CoAR Coordination of Afghan Relief
CORDAID Catholic Organization for Relief and Development Aid
CPiE Child Protection in Emergencies
CRDSA Coordination Of Rehabilitation & Development Services
For Afghanistan
CRS Catholic Relief Services
CVWG Cash and Vouchers Working Group
DACAAR Danish Committee for Aid to Afghan Refugees
DAIL Department of Agriculture Irrigation and Livestock
DAO Development and Ability Organization
DED District Education Department
DFID Department for International Development
DoRR Department of Refugee and Repatriation
DPG Development Partners Group
DRC Danish Refugee Council
DSWG Durable Solutions Working Group
EFSA Emergency Food Security Assessment
EiE Education in Emergencies
EiEWG Education in Emergencies Working Group
EOD Explosive Ordnance Disposal
EPD Equality for Peace and Democracy
EPHS Essential Package of Hospital Services
EQRA Education Quality Reform in Afghanistan
ERC Emergency Relief Coordinator
ERM Emergency Response Mechanism
ERP Emergency Response Preparedness
ERW Explosve Remnants of War
ESNFI Emergency Shelter and Non-Food Items
FAM	Famine Action Mechanism
FAO Food and Agriculture Organization
FATP First Aid Treatment Posts
FEWSNET Famine Early Warning Systems Network
FGA Future Generation Afghanistan
FSAC Food Security and Agriculture Cluster
FTS Financial Tracking Service
GAM Global Acute Malnutrition
GAM Gender and Age Marker
GBV Gender-Based Violence
GiHATF Gender in Humanitarian Action Task Force
HADAAF Humanitarian Assistance and Development Association
for Afghanistan
HAG Humanitarian Access Group
HAPA Humanitarian Action For the People Of Afghanistan
HCAWG Humanitarian Coordinated Assessment Working Group
HCT Humanitarian Country Team
HEAT Household Emergency Assessment Tool
HEWAD Hewad Reconstruction Health And Humanitarian
Assistance Committee
HH Household
HI Handicap International
HLP Housing, Land and Property
HLP-TF Housing, Land, and Property Taskforce
HMIS Health Management Information System
HNO Humanitarian Needs Overview
HN-TPO Health Net International Transcultural Psychosocial
Organization / Health Works
HRDA Human Resource Development Agency
HRP Humanitarian Response Plan
HRT Humanitarian Regional Team
HTR Hard-to-reach
ICCT Inter-Cluster Coordination Team
ICRC International Committee of the Red Cross
IDP Internally Displaced Person
IFRC International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent
Societies
IHL International Humanitarian Law
IHRL International Human Rights Law
IM	Information Management
IMAM Integrated Management of Acute Malnutrition
IMC International Medical Corps
IMCI Integrated Management of Childhood Illnesses
IMM AP Information Management and Mine Action Programs
INGO International Non-Governmental Organisation
INSO-SE International NGO Safety Organisation - South East
IOM International Organisation for Migration
PART III - ANNEXES: Acronyms
76
IPC Integrated Food Security Phase Classification
IRC International Rescue Committee
ISK Islamic State of Khorasan/Daesh
ISSS Inter-Sector Severity Scale
IYCF-E Infant and Young Child feeding practices in Emergency
LCD Legal Civil Documentation
MADERA M ission d’Aide au Développement des Economies
Rurales en Afghanistan / Mission to Support the
Development of Rural Economies in Afghanistan
MAF M utual Accountability Framework
MAIL M inistry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Livestock
MAM M oderate Acute Malnutrition
ME M ission East
MHT M obile Health Team
MM RCA M edical Management and Research Courses for
Afghanistan
MoPH M inistry of Public Health
MoRR M inistry of Refugees and Repatriations
MoU M emorandum of Understanding
MOVE M ove Welfare Organization
MPC M ulti Purpose Cash
MRCA M edical Refresher Courses for Afghans
MRE M ine Risk Education
MRM	M onitoring and Reporting Mechanism
MRRD M inistry of Rural Rehabilitation and Development
MSF M édecins Sans Frontières / Doctors Without Borders
N/A Not Available
NAC Norwegian Afghanistan Committee
NCA Norwegian Church Aid
NCRO New Consultancy and Relief Organization
NEI Nutrition & Education International
NFI Non-Food Items
NGO Non-Governmental Organisation
NiE Nutrition in Emergencies
NPO/RRAA Norwegian Project Office/Rural Rehabilitation
Association for Afghanistan
NRC Norwegian Refugee Council
NSAG Non-State Armed Group
NWOW New Way of Working
OCCD Organization for Community Coordination
Development
OCHA Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
O-HASA Organization for Humanitarian Assistance & Services
for Afghanistan
OHPM	Organization for Health Promotion and Management
OHW Organization of Human Welfare
ORCD Organization For Research and Community
Development
ORD Organization For Relief Development
PAC People Action for Change
PACO People Action For Change organization
PED Provincial Education Department
PIMS Protection Incident Monitoring System
PIN People In Need (org)
PiN People in Need
PLW Pregnant and Lactating Women
PMT Programme Management Team
PoC Protection of Civilians
PoC Persons of Concern
PSEA Protection from Sexual Exploitation and Abuse
PSN People with Specific Needs
PU-AMI Première Urgence Internationale
PUI Première Urgence Internationale
QRCS Q atar Red Crescent Society
RC Resident Coordinator
RELIEF INT Relief International
RRAA Rural Rehabilitation Association for Afghanistan
RUTF Ready-to-use therapeutic food
SADD Sex and Age Disaggregated Data
SAF South Asia Foundation
SAM Severe Acute Malnutrition
SBCC Social and Behavioural Change Communication
SC Save the Children
SCA Swedish Committee for Afghanistan
SCI Save the Children International
SDG Sustainable Development Goal
SDO Sanayee Development Organization
SEA Sexual Exploitation and Abuse
SGBV Sexual and Gender-Based Violence
SHC Sub-Health Centre
SHPOUL Sound Humanitarian, Participatory and Organisational
Uplift
SHRO Shahamat Health and Rehabilitation Organization
Sida Swedish International Development Cooperation
Agency
SMART Standardised Monitoring and Assessment of Relief and
Transition
SMEB	Survival Minimum Expenditure Basket
SO Strategic Objective
SOFAR Salam Organisation For Afghanistan Rehabilitation
SI Solidarités International
TDH Terre Des Hommes
TIKA Turkish Cooperation and Coordination Agency
TLO The Liaison Office
TLS Temporary Learning Spaces
TSFP Targeted Supplementary Feeding Programme
UN United Nations
UNAMA United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
UNCT United Nations Country Team
UNDP United Nations Development Program
UNFPA United Nations Population Fund
UNHAS United Nations Humanitarian Air Service
UNHCR United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
UNICEF United Nations Children’s Fund
UNMAS United Nations Mine Action Service
UNOPS The United Nations Office for Project Services
US$ United States dollar
USAID United States Agency for International Development
UXO Unexploded Ordnance
WADAN Welfare Association for the Development of
Afghanistan
WASH Water Sanitation and Hygiene
WC War Child
WCC War Child Canada
WC-Canada War Child - Canada
WC-UK War Child - United Kingdom
WFP World Food Programme
WHH Welthungerhilfe
WHO World Health Organisation
WoA Whole of Afghanistan Assessment
WSTA Watan Social and Technical service Association
WVA World Vision Afghanistan
WVI World Vision International
YHDO Y outh Health and Development Organisation
ZOA South East Asia (Dutch)
PART III - ANNEXES: References
77 #
1. 106 districts scored 4 or 5 in a severity scale from 0 to 5. The scales are
based on three indicators: i) IDPs at district of origin; ii) civilian casualties;
iii) armed conflict incidents and air strikes. Each of these indicators was
normalised to a scale of 0 to 5 on a logarithmic scale using the min-max
method (as outlined on page 12 here: http://hdr.undp.org/sites/default/files/
hdi_training.pdf) The scales were reversed (5 – score), and a geometric mean
(cube root of the three scores multiplied together) of the three was used
to calculate the overall severity score. This is the same method used in the
INFORM index (http://www.inform-index.org/), and the severity scores will be
comparable over time.
2. UNAMA Human Rights, Quarterly Report on the Protection of Civilians in
Armed Conflict: 1 January to 30 September 2018, https://unama.unmissions.
org/sites/default/ files/unama_protection_of_civilians_in_armed_conflict_3rd_
quarter_ report_2018_10_oct.pdf
3. ibid
4. Access Monitoring and Reporting Framework (AMRF), compiled by
OCHA Access Unit. Between January and September 2018 there were 38 aid
workers injured and 20 killed. In the same period of 2017, there were nine aid
workers injured and 14 killed.
5. ibid
6. Afghanistan Health Cluster, September 2018
7. REACH Initiative, Whole of Afghanistan (WoA) Assessment, August
2018, https://data.humdata.org/dataset/whole-of-afghanistan-assessmenthousehold-
dataset-august-2018
8. Crabtree, Afghans’ Misery Reflected in Record-Low Well-Being Measures,
26 October, 2018, https://news.gallup.com/poll/244118/afghans-miseryreflected-
record-low-measures.aspx
9. 262,165 people or 38,143 families displaced as of 30 October 2018,
OCHA Afghanistan interactive dashboard, Internal displacement due to
conflict.
10. OCHA Afghanistan, Afghanistan Humanitarian Bulletin Issue 78, 1 July
– 30 September 2018, https://reliefweb.int/report/afghanistan/afghanistanhumanitarian-
bulletin-issue-78-1-july-30-september-2018
11. REACH Initiative, Whole of Afghanistan (WoA) Assessment, loc. cit.
12. Ministry of Education, Islamic Republic of Afghanistan, and UNICEF,
Global initiative on children out of school – Afghanistan Country Study, June
2018, https://www.unicef.org/afghanistan/reports/global-initiative-outschool-
children
13. IOM Afghanistan, Return of undocumented Afghans - Weekly situation
report, 21-27 October 2018, https://afghanistan.iom.int/sites/default/files/
Reports/iom_afghanistan-return_of_undocumented_afghans-_situation_
report_21-27_october_2018.pdf
14. OCHA Afghanistan, 2018 Afghanistan Humanitarian Needs Overview,
pg. 8, https://www.humanitarianresponse.info/en/operations/afghanistan/
document/afghanistan-humanitarian-needs-overview-2018
15. IOM DTM Afghanistan, Baseline Mobility Assessment Summary Results
(July — Sep 2018)
16. This includes 12,811 registered refugee returnees from Pakistan
and circa. 25,150 undocumented returnees. IOM Afghanistan, Return of
undocumented Afghans - Weekly situation report, 16-22 September 2018,
https://afghanistan.iom.int/sites/default/files/Reports/iom_afghanistan-return_
of_undocumented_afghans-_situation_report-_16_-_22_september_2018.pdf
17. NRC, Escaping War: Where to Next? The Challenges of IDP Protection in
Afghanistan, January 2018 https://www.nrc.no/resources/reports/escapingwar-
where-to-next-the-challenges-of-idp-protection-in-Afghanistan/
18. Fewsnet, Afghanistan Food Security Outlook, October 2018 to February
2019, http://fews.net/central-asia/afghanistan
19. Integrated Food Security Phase Classification, Afghanistan IPC Acute
Food Insecurity Analysis, August 2018-February 2019, Report #10, Issued
November 2018. http://www.ipcinfo.org/fileadmin/user_upload/ipcinfo/docs/
IPC_Aghanistan_AcuteFI_Nov2018_Final.pdf
20. UNICEF, Child Marriage in Afghanistan, July 2018, https://www.unicef.it/
Allegati/Child_Marriage_in_Afghanistan.pdf
21. Protection cluster monitoring, Western Region, September 2018
22. Mugali, Mansoor, Parwiz, Ahmad, Safi, Higgins-Steele & Varkey, Improving
immunization in Afghanistan: results from a cross-sectional communitybased
survey to assess routine immunization coverage, 4 April 2017, https://
bmcpublichealth.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12889-017-4193-z
23. NRC, Afghanistan, Trader Survey, April/May 2018.
24. Afghanistan health indicators, WHO Afghanistan Country Office 2018
25. Afghanistan Health cluster, Country Task Force on Monitoring and
Reporting Data, October 2018
26. Contini, Taqdeer, Cherian, Shokohmand, Gosselin, Graaff and Noe,
Emergency and Essential Surgical Services in Afghanistan: Still a Missing
Challenge, World Journal of Surgery ,20 January 2010 http://www.who.int/
surgery/publications/eesc-afghanistan.pdf
27. Since 2016 humanitarian funding has supported the establishment of 62
first aid trauma posts.
28. UNICEF data, 2018. 203,000 girls; 341,000 boys.
29. UNAMA Human Rights, Quarterly Report on the Protection of Civilians in
Armed Conflict, loc. cit.
30. Christian Children’s Fund, Children in Conflict: Afghanistan,
April 2003, https://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/resources/
AEE6B74580699E2B4925759400066977-Full_Report.pdf
31. Asia Foundation, Afghanistan in 2017 - a survey of the Afghan people,
November 2017, https://asiafoundation.org/publication/afghanistan-2017-
survey-afghan-people/
32. Save the Children, From Europe to Afghanistan: Experiences of Child
Returnees, October 2018, https://reliefweb.int/report/afghanistan/europeafghanistan-
experiences-child-returnees
33. FEWSNET, Drought Update, 20 September 2018, http://fews.net/centralasia/
afghanistan/key-message-update/september-2018
34. Integrated Food Security Phase Classification, Afghanistan IPC Acute
Food Insecurity Analysis, August 2018-February 2019, Report #10, Issued
November 2018. http://www.ipcinfo.org/fileadmin/user_ upload/ipcinfo/docs/
IPC_Aghanistan_AcuteFI_Nov2018_Final.pdf
35. See Response Parameters section (pp. 12-13) of the 2018-2021
Afghanistan Humanitarian Response Plan, December 2017: https://
www.humanitarianresponse.info/en/operations/afghanistan/document/
afghanistan-humanitarian-response-plan-2018-2021
36. The One UN for Afghanistan programme is the UN Country Team’s
(UNCT) equivalent to the United Nations Development Assistance Framework
(UNDAF). One UN for Afghanistan (2018-2021), https://www.af.one.un.org/
enigma-service/lorem-ipsum-2/
37. See pp. 17-18 of the 2019 Afghanistan HNO for further details: https://
www.humanitarianresponse.info/sites/www.humanitarianresponse.info/files/
documents/files/afg_2019_humanitarian_needs_overview.pdf
38. These include armed conflict/protection of civilians; population
movement/forced displacement; slow and sudden onset natural disasters and
access to basic services.
39. The operational arm of the UNCT.
40. The PIMS serves as a central repository for data collected vis-à-vis
protection violation
41. The objectives of the HCT protection strategy are: i) The mitigation of
protection risks and reducing the exposure of civilians to violence and life
threatening conditions; ii) Emergency humanitarian protection and assistance
is extended to all persons in need, particularly in hard to reach areas, on the
basis of their vulnerabilities, in safety and dignity, in accordance with the
principles of equity, accountability and ‘do no harm,’ and in a conflict-sensitive
manner; iii) The Government of Afghanistan, supported by humanitarian
and development partners, addresses the protection of IDPs in protracted
displacement, and of returnees, focusing on the implementation of the
National IDP Policy, the DiREC Policy Framework for Returnees and IDPs and
‘the whole of community approach’ at the nexus between humanitarian and
development programming, to achieve durable solutions.
42. Perfidious acts are those in which the attacker feigns protected civilian
status to carry out an attack, such as using an ambulance to conceal bombs.
43. Other priority advocacy topics include: urging the Afghan Air Forces
and International Military Forces to review their targeting criteria and preengagement
precautionary measures given the increasing civilian casualties
from airstrikes, as well as additional financial support for EOD teams under
Protocol V to ensure that the Government meets its obligations for clearance
as soon as possible after fighting in locations where they have taken/re-gained
control.
REFERENCES
PART III - ANNEXES: References
78
44. This forum last met in February 2016 and February 2017.
45. Human Rights Watch, No Safe Place: Insurgent Attacks on Civilians in
Afghanistan, May 2018, https://www.hrw.org/report/2018/05/08/no-safeplace/
insurgent-attacks-civilians-afghanistan
46. Eight out of ten female-headed households are food insecure compared
to seven out of ten male-headed households. FSAC & Government of
Afghanistan, Emergency Food Security Assessment, 2018.
47. REACH Initiative, Whole of Afghanistan (WoA) Assessment, loc. cit.
48. World Bank, Afghanistan to 2030: Priorities for Economic Development
Under Fragility, 6 August, 2018. https://www.worldbank.org/en/ country/
afghanistan/publication/afghanis
49. IOM Afghanistan, DTM Data, Feb – September through the Nimroz and
Islam Qala border crossings.
50. United States Institute of Peace, Redefining Masculinity in Afghanistan,
February2018, https://www.usip.org/publications/2018/02/redefiningmasculinity-
afghanistan
51. Malikyar, H, Al Jazeera, Afghanistan: Pity the children, February 2016
https://www.aljazeera.com/indepth/opinion/2016/02/afghanistan-pitychildren-
160210082008267.html
52. World Bank, Afghanistan to 2030: Priorities for Economic Development
Under Fragility, loc cit.
53. REACH Initiative, Whole of Afghanistan (WoA) Assessment, loc. cit.
54. FSAC & Government of Afghanistan, Emergency Food Security
Assessment, loc cit.
55. REACH Initiative, Whole of Afghanistan (WoA) Assessment, loc. cit.
56. Awaaz Afghanistan is an inter-agency platform through which complaints
and feedback received from affected people are received and resolved.
57. This includes cash grants and vouchers. In 2018, cash transfers
accounted for 95 per cent ($20 million) of the total value of funds transferred
though cash-based interventions in Afghanistan and 5 per cent accounted for
vouchers ($1 million).
58. The SMEB is the cash value equivalent of a selected group of basic
goods, services or items that are necessary to ensure household survival for
two months. Less vulnerable households receive 17,000 AFN for one month
covering the following needs: food [6,000 AFN]; NFI (kitchen Kits) [4,000
AFN]; Shelter/WASH [2,000 AFN]; fuel [2,000 AFN]; health expenditures
[2,000 AFN] and transportation [1,000 AFN]. More vulnerable households
receive a top-up of 11,000 AFN in the second month covering: food [6,000
AFN]; NFI (kitchen Kits) [N/A]; Shelter/WASH [1,000 AFN]; fuel [2,000 AFN];
health expenditures [2,000 AFN] and transportation [N/A].
59. In May 2018, ERM partners moved towards stricter targeting criteria,
aiming to reach people displaced within the preceding three months, down
from six months under the previous ERM rules, and who meet specific
vulnerability criteria (specific household food security indicators and debt
levels). Furthermore, a two-tier assistance package was introduced, with
households that were classified as extremely vulnerable receiving the full
survival minimum expenditure basked (SMEB) covering needs for two months
($375 per HH), and less vulnerable households receiving assistance for one
month only ($225).
60. Overview of cash transfers and vouchers in 2018 Humanitarian
Response Plan, September 2018, https://www.humanitarianresponse.info/
en/operations/afghanistan/document/afghanistan-humanitarian-responseplan-
2018-2021
61. The AMRF captured 278 incidents from January – September 2018,
comparable to the 251 incidents tracked from May 2017 to the end of that
year.
62. Afghanistan is currently ranked 8th of 170 in the coming 30 years
for vulnerability to climate change impacts. World Bank, Famine Action
Mechanism Concept Note, November 2018.
63. IOM Afghanistan, DTM data, September 2018.
64. Afghanistan Health cluster, September 2018.
65. 49,000 from Pakistan and 119,000 from Iran.
66. This is particularly the case following the recent decision of the
Afghanistan and Pakistan governments to agree on a timeline for the
repatriation of people from Afghanistan living in Pakistan under the APAPPS.
As it stands, 50,000 undocumented people from Afghanistan – out of a total
of 400,000 undocumented people– may be repatriated between March and
June 2019.
67. For double shifting classes, a teacher runs one class of students in
the morning and the other class in the afternoon. Similarly, for triple shifts,
the teacher divides the day into three and runs three separate classes with
measures in place to minimise the impact on teaching quality. As per CBE
policy, for primary school grades, the normal teaching time should be three
hours.
68. Global Initiative on Out-Of-School Children, Afghanistan Country Study,
2018, Ministry of Education and UNICEF, https://www.unicef.org/afghanistan/
reports/global-initiative-out-school-children
69. Joint Education and Child Protection (JENA) handbook, a study
conducted by REACH and other EiE assessments.
70. Afghanistan Central Statistics Organisation, Afghanistan Living
Conditions Survey, 2016/17, http://cso.gov.af/Content/files/ALCS/ALCS%20
2016-17%20Analysis%20report%20-%20Full%20report23%20_09%20
2018-ilovepdf-compressed.pdf
71. Integrated Food Security Phase Classification, Afghanistan IPC Acute
Food Insecurity Analysis, August 2018-February 2019, Report #10, Issued
November 2018. Note: Flowminder population estimates have been used as
the basis for IPC calculations in the HRP.
72. WASH cluster partners’ needs assessment reports 2016-2017
73. DACCAR conducted post-distribution surveys among the ERM partnerassisted
projects in North in 2016
74. $25 to $55 per person for transportation - depending on travel distance -
and $100 per household for NFI.
PART III - ANNEXES: References
79 #
EMERGENCY
SHELTER & NFI
A lack of
shelter assistance and
essential household
items would mean that
people would be forced
to live with limited or
no privacy and dignity,
exposing vulnerable
families including
women, children and
older people to harsh
weather conditions, which
may lead to mortality
and negative coping
mechanisms such as early
marriages, child labour
and other protection risks.
FOOD
SECURITY &
AGRICULTURE
If the timely food and
livelihoods supports are
not provided to the 4.9
million people in need of
humanitarian support,
their livelihoods will be
lost, they will resort to
negative coping strategies.
The absence of timely
food and livelihoods
support may lead to
widespread migration,
disease, malnutrition and
deaths.
HEALTH
In light of
the ongoing
conflict and chronic
under-development,
increased death and
suffering will occur. Up
to 250,000 people with
trauma-related injuries
will not receive essential
care and disability support
and 270,000 IDPs will be
denied access to essential
life-saving health services,
including 120,000 women
of reproductive age who
will not receive essential
reproductive health care.
WHAT IF?
...WE FAIL TO RESPOND
WATER,
SANITATION,
HYGIENE
The basic human rights
of more than 1.3 million
people will be violated;
the lives of nearly 300,000
children under-five will
be at risk of disease and
even death; and the
dignity of over 350,000
women and adolescent
girls compromised due
to exposure to potential
abuse and harassment in
the absence of these basic
services.
EDUCATION IN
EMERGENCIES
Education
contributes to restoring
normality in the lives of
children through a return
to familiar routines,
instilling hope for the
future, and mitigating
the psychosocial
impact of violence and
displacement. If we fail to
provide on time education
support, children’s
protection, development
and life would be at risk.
REFUGEE
CHAPTER
Without
humanitarian action, a
generation of refugee
children and youth are
at risk of permanent
disruption to their wellbeing
and education,
threatening their future
prospects. Food insecurity
for refugees could lead
to malnutrition and
use of negative coping
mechanisms.
MULTI-PURPOSE CASH ASSISTANCE
Without the cash needed to survive, conflict IDPs and returnees will be unable to meet their basic needs during the
first few weeks of displacement, and frequently resort to negative coping strategies with devastating long-term impacts
on the households, especially children.
NUTRITION
Children
under five
affected by malnutrition,
particularly severe acute
malnutrition (SAM), will
die unless they receive
help. Children who are
suffering from SAM
are nine times as likely
to die when compared
to apparently healthy
children who aren’t
affected by SAM.
PROTECTION
Abuses will
increase,
displacement
will continue and
development gains will
be reversed, exacerbating
existing vulnerabilities
and contributing to the
adoption of negative
coping mechanisms and
potentially migration.
Persons of concern will
remain unable to access
remedies for protection
violations, and their safety
and dignity will continue
to be at risk.
CONTRIBUTING
TO THE
HUMANITARIAN
RESPONSE PLAN
To see the country’s
humanitarian needs overview,
humanitarian response plan
and monitoring reports, and
donate directly to organisations
participating to the plan, please
visit :
www.humanitarian
response.info/
operations/
afghanistan
DONATING
THROUGH
THE CENTRAL
EMERGENCY RESPONSE FUND
(CERF)
The CERF provides rapid initial
funding for life-saving actions
at the onset of emergencies and
for poorly funded, essential
humanitarian operations in
protracted crises. The OCHAmanaged
CERF receives
contributions from various
donors – mainly governments,
but also private companies,
foundations, charities and
individuals – which are
combined into a single fund.
This is used for crises anywhere
in the world. Find out more
about the CERF and how to
donate by visiting the CERF
website:
www.unocha.org/
cerf/our-donors/
how-donate
DONATING
THROUGH THE
AFGHANISTAN
HUMANITARIAN FUND (AHF)
The AHF is a country-based
pooled fund (CBPF). CBPFs
are multi-donor humanitarian
financing instruments
established by the Emergency
Relief Coordinator and managed
by OCHA at the country level
under the leadership of the
Humanitarian Coordinator.
Find out more about CBPFs and
how to make a contribution by
visiting:
www.unocha.
org/what-we-do/
humanitarianfinancing/
countrybased-
pooled-funds
For information about the AHF,
please contact:
ahf-afg@un.org
IN-KIND RELIEF
The United Nations urges donors to make cash rather than in-kind donations, for maximum speed and
flexibility, and to ensure the supplies that are most needed are the ones delivered. If you can make only inkind
contributions in response to disasters and emergencies, please contact:
logik@un.org
HRP
REGISTERING AND RECOGNISING YOUR CONTRIBUTIONS
OCHA manages the Financial Tracking Service (FTS), which records all reported humanitarian contributions
(cash, in-kind, multilateral and bilateral) to emergencies. Its purpose is to give credit and visibility
to donors for their generosity, to show the total amount of funding, and to expose gaps in humanitarian
plans. Please report yours to FTS, either by email to fts@un.org or through the online contribution report
form at http://fts.unocha.org
GUIDE TO GIVING

This document is produced on behalf of the Humanitarian Country Team and partners.
This document provides the Humanitarian Country Team’s shared understanding of the crisis, including the most pressing
humanitarian needs, and reflects its joint humanitarian response planning.
The designation employed and the presentation of material on this report do not imply the expression of any opinion
whatsoever on the part of the Humanitarian Country Team and partners concerning the legal status of any country, territory,
city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.
Publication date: December 2018
www.unocha.org/afghanistan
www.humanitarianresponse.info/operations/afghanistan
@OCHAAfg