Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela 1
REGIONAL REFUGEE AND MIGRANT
RESPONSE PLAN
for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela
January - December 2019
2 Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants f rom Venezuela
Cover Picture:
Rumichaca, border of Colombia with Ecuador. Laila Dailia Leon, three years old sitting on the
shoulders of her father Jose Ramon Leon. Jose is a fisherman from Venezuela, now travelling with
his wife and two daughters to Quito.
© UNICEF/Santiago Arcos
Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela 3
Contents
Foreword ................................................................................................................... 5
Regional Strategic Overview ...................................................................................... 7
Background and Context....................................................................................... 11
Partnership and Coordination ............................................................................... 12
Population Groups, Planning Figures and Assumptions ....................................... 14
Overarching Population’s Needs across the Region ............................................. 17
Regional Response Strategy and Priorities........................................................... 19
Implementation of the RMRP: Coordination, Monitoring and Reporting ................ 22
Brazil Refugee and Migrant Response Plan ............................................................. 25
Introduction - Background and Achievements....................................................... 27
Joint Needs Analysis ............................................................................................. 28
Areas of Intervention, Country Objectives and Priorities ....................................... 31
Summary of Objectives for 2019 ........................................................................... 34
Partnership and Coordination ............................................................................... 35
Colombia Refugee and Migrant Response Plan ....................................................... 37
Introduction - Background and Achievements....................................................... 39
Joint Needs Analysis ............................................................................................. 42
Areas of Intervention, Country Objectives and Priorities ....................................... 45
Summary of Objectives for 2019 ........................................................................... 48
Partnership and Coordination ............................................................................... 49
Ecuador Refugee and Migrant Response Plan......................................................... 51
Introduction - Background and Achievements....................................................... 53
Joint Needs Analysis ............................................................................................. 55
Areas of Intervention, Country Objectives and Priorities ....................................... 57
Summary of Objectives for 2019 ........................................................................... 61
Partnership and Coordination ............................................................................... 62
Peru Refugee and Migrant Response Plan .............................................................. 65
Introduction - Background and Achievements....................................................... 67
Joint Needs Analysis ............................................................................................. 69
Areas of Intervention, Country Objectives and Priorities ....................................... 71
Summary of Objectives for 2019 ........................................................................... 74
Partnership and Coordination ............................................................................... 75
Caribbean Sub-Regional Refugee and Migrant Response Plan ............................... 77
Introduction - Background and Achievements....................................................... 79
Joint Needs Analysis ............................................................................................. 80
4 Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela
Areas of Intervention, Country Objectives and Priorities ....................................... 83
Summary of Objectives for 2019 ........................................................................... 87
Partnership and Coordination ................................................................................ 88
Central America and Mexico Sub-Regional Refugee and Migrant Response Plan .. 89
Introduction - Background and Achievements....................................................... 91
Joint Needs Analysis ............................................................................................. 93
Areas of Intervention, Country Objectives and Priorities ....................................... 95
Summary of Objectives for 2019 ......................................................................... ..98
Partnership and Coordination ............................................................................... 99
Southern Cone Sub-Regional Refugee and Migrant Response Plan ..................... 101
Introduction - Background and Achievements..................................................... 103
Joint Needs Analysis ........................................................................................... 105
Areas of Intervention, Country Objectives and Priorities ..................................... 108
Summary of Objectives for 2019 ......................................................................... 110
Partnership and Coordination ............................................................................. 111
Abbreviations and Acronyms .................................................................................. 112
Annex 1: Financial Requirement by Organization and Country .............................. 113
Annex 2: Financial Requirement by Area of Intervention and Country .................... 116
Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela 5
Foreword
It seems a long time since I took my role as UNHCR and IOM Joint Special
Representative for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela. However, it was just less
than three months ago that I embarked in this challenging but passionate journey.
Since then, I have had the opportunity to visit Colombia, Ecuador and Peru and meet
their highest public authorities as well as visiting several critical border crossing points.
I have also discussed with many Governments, thinkers, decision-makers,
humanitarians, Venezuelans. All of them have opened my eyes to the magnitude and
complexity of this outflow and the strong need for support.
To date, some three million Venezuelans have left their country, the vast majority
arriving to countries in Latin America and the Caribbean. This is an unprecedented
movement for this region. Venezuelans I met during my visits spoke of hunger, lack of
access to medical care, insecurity, threats, fear. They are families, women alone,
children, young boys and girls, all in conditions of extreme vulnerability. All of them
saw no other option than to leave their country – sometimes walking for days – seeking
to live in dignity and to build a future. Beyond the most immediate humanitarian
impacts of the largest displacement of people in the history of Latin America, there are
other quite complex implications for which we were not prepared as a region.
It is a privilege and an enormous challenge to be able to take this role which was
entrusted to me by the UN High Commissioner for Refugees and IOM’s Director
General. I understand clearly the fundamental humanitarian aim of my function; and
in my work I expect to promote further harmonization and coherence in the response
to the Venezuela Situation, always in support of the Governments of receiving
countries and in close coordination with the international community and civil society.
I count myself amongst the many Latin Americans that have been moved and
impressed by the remarkable responses, dedication and the solidarity of the
Governments, humanitarian organisations and local communities I have visited. Main
receiving countries have maintained their hospitality and kept their borders open to
Venezuelan refugees and migrants, showing solidarity with the Venezuelan people,
who in turn have always been very generous in hosting a large number of refugees
and migrants.
But a lot more needs to be done. There are still significant gaps and challenges, in
particular regarding documentation, regularisation, capacity of asylum systems,
access to basic services such as health and education, shelter and protection that
need to be addressed. Testimonies from courageous survivors of trafficking networks,
smugglers, sexual and labour exploitation have deeply affected all of us. Worrisome
signs of discrimination and xenophobia have begun to sprout, casting a shadow over
the tradition of generosity of this region.
Only a regional comprehensive, predictable and harmonized response to the needs of
Venezuelan refugees and migrants will enable them to cope with the magnitude of
their plight and ensure their safety. The regional inter-agency coordination platform for
the humanitarian response to the needs of refugees and migrants from Venezuela
strives to strengthen coordination with existing humanitarian and UN architectures,
6 Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela
main receiving authorities – at regional, national, but also at local level – civil
society and local initiatives, and foster a comprehensive, predictable and
harmonized response to the plight of Venezuelans.
In this vein, Governments in the region are putting in place regional and
national plans and responses to meet urgent humanitarian needs while helping
the inclusion of Venezuelans in their societies. The approach and Action Plan
adopted within the Quito Process stresses the willingness of countries in the
region to find a coordinated regional response for a regional problem, putting
the protection of refugees and migrants from Venezuela at the forefront of their
priorities. But the goodwill and generosity of Governments in the region and the
local communities must not be taken for granted. The impact of the enormous
quantities of arrivals on the services and economies of these receiving countries is
immense and overburdens their institutional and financial capacity. It is time to scale
up responses and mobilize international support.
The Regional Refugee and Migrant Response Plan (RMRP) shows the way forward.
A total of 95 organizations in 16 countries have come together to put in place in a
record time a coordinated roadmap for action to respond to the urgent humanitarian
needs of the refugees and migrants from Venezuelan but also a plan to secure their
social and economic inclusion in the communities that receive them. Finally, this plan
is a call to the donor community, including the international financial institutions and
development actors which can play a key role in this situation, to increase their support
to refugees and migrants in the region and the host communities which have
kindly opened their arms to them.
We thank you for your interest in supporting this collective effort to protect and assist
millions of Venezuelan migrants and refugees hosted in countries across Latin
America and the Caribbean.
Eduardo Stein
Joint Special Representative
for Venezuelan refugees and migrants
REGIONAL
STRATEGIC
OVERVIEW
CURACAO
ARGENTINA
BARBADOS
BOLIVIA
BRAZIL
BAHAMAS, THE
BELIZE
CHILE
COLOMBIA
COSTA RICA
CUBA
DOMINICA
DOMINICAN
REPUBLIC
ECUADOR
GUATEMALA HONDURAS
JAMAICA
MEXICO
NICARAGUA
PANAMA
PERU
PARAGUAY
EL SALVADOR
TURKS AND
CAICOS ISLANDS
TRINIDAD
AND TOBAGO
UNITED STATES
URUGUAY
GUAYANA
Buenos Aires
La Paz
Brasília
Santiago
Bogotá
Havana
Quito
México
Panamá
Asunción
Lima
Paramaribo
Montevideo
Caracas
VENEZUELA,
BOLIVARIAN
REPUBLIC OF
±
Boa Vista
RMRP Regional Overview
3.6 MILLION
Refugees and
Migrants in Need
2.2 MILLION
Refugees and
Migrants Targeted
USD 738M
Financial
Requirements
95
RMRP
Partners
Regional Population Movements
Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela
in Latin America and Caribbean
RMRP Key Figures
PLANNING FIGURES:
REFUGEES AND MIGRANTS
RMRP Financial Breakdown
TOTAL $ 737,611,378
1
Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela 11
Background and Context
The ongoing political, human rights and socio-economic developments in the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (hereinafter Venezuela) have led to the outflow of
more than three million Venezuelans into neighbouring countries and beyond. The
exodus of Venezuelan nationals is already the largest in the modern history of Latin
America and the Caribbean and involves both refugees and migrants from Venezuela.
Based on conservative government figures, it is estimated that the number of
Venezuelans in countries across Latin America rose from 700,000 in 2015 to over
three million in November 2018. Nevertheless, the total number of Venezuelans in the
region is likely to be higher, as most data sources do not account for Venezuelans
without regular status.
For decades, countries in Latin America and the Caribbean have pioneered and made
fundamental contributions to the pursuit of protection and solution for refugees and
migrants. This time again, the continent has demonstrated solidarity and generosity
towards Venezuelans largely maintaining an open-border policy. To date, 958,965
Venezuelans are benefitting from a regular status in the region, while 365,565 globally
have filed an asylum claim. However, with more than 5,000 daily arrivals,2 national
capacities and host communities are overstretched, increasing the risk of xenophobia
if their needs are not addressed. In addition, a significant number of Venezuelans
remain in an irregular situation, due to various factors including lack of documentation,
administrative obstacles, long waiting periods, or high application fees, among others.
In some countries, their irregular situation leaves them without rights and access to
services, and therefore vulnerable to all forms of exploitation and abuse, violence, and
discrimination.
Experience shows that large-scale population movements persist and deteriorate in
the absence of political solutions and sustained international solidarity. Given the
magnitude of the outflow of Venezuelans, only a region-wide coordinated and
comprehensive approach between governments – with the support of the international
community – will enable the region to cope with the scale of the influx.
With this objective in mind, the Regional Refugee and Migrant Response Plan
(hereinafter “RMRP” or “the Plan”) has been developed to support and complement
national authorities across Latin America and the Caribbean. The RMRP seeks to
respond to the population’s needs in a holistic and comprehensive manner, in line with
governments’ priorities, complementing their response plans, within the framework of
regionalized response and coordination mechanisms.
2 Data from Migracion Colombia, published on 18 July 2018, available at:
http://www.migracioncolombia.gov.co/index.php/es/prensa/infografias/infografias-2018/7923-infografia-general
12 Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela
Partnership and Coordination
Since 2017, with the continuous outflows from Venezuela, inter-agency
preparedness and operational activities to respond to the growing needs have
scaled up. In April 2018, the United Nations (UN) Secretary-General asked the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and the International
Organization for Migration (IOM) to coordinate and steer the operational response.
The Regional Inter-Agency Coordination Platform, established by IOM and UNHCR
in September 2018, is at the core of these coordination efforts. The Regional
Platform is an agile and flexible instrument, which aims to develop a regional
approach to ensure a coherent and coordinated operational response. It does so by
focusing on regional strategic and country-specific support, information
management, communication and resource mobilization. The Platform, both at the
regional and national levels, work in very close relation with UN Development Group
for Latin America and the Caribbean (UNDG LAC), the Resident Coordinators (RC)
and the UN Country Teams (UNCTs) and are mutually supportive of their respective
roles. The pivotal role of the RCs in support of national priorities, development
strategies, and plans is particularly relevant to the work of the platform. Currently,
the Regional Platform has 40 participating entities, including 17 UN agencies, 14
non-governmental organizations (NGOs), five donors and two international
financial institutions. Under the coordination leadership of UNHCR and IOM,
country-level coordination platforms have been set up in Brazil, Colombia,
Ecuador, Peru and other impacted countries.
In addition, UNHCR and IOM have appointed a Joint Special Representative,
Mr. Eduardo Stein, tasked with promoting a coherent and harmonized regional
approach in coordination with national governments, international organizations,
non-traditional actors, and other relevant stakeholders.
The regional RMRP represents the framework for an inter-agency response and
a coherent and predictable package of interventions based on common
analysis, available assessments of the situation, and the comparative
advantages of 95 partners involved in the operational response in 16 countries.3
The regional plan is needs-based and, as such, it encompasses the immediate
support by the international multilateral community to the existing and estimated
needs for 2019. It is a strategy, an operational blueprint, and a coordination
template, as well as an appeal document. These independent yet interconnected
functions of the RMRP aim to provide a holistic, integrated, and comprehensive
response to the needs of refugees and migrants.
3 Countries in Latin America and the Caribbean involved in this RMRP include Argentina, Aruba, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa
Rica, Curaçao, Ecuador, the Dominican Republic, Guyana, Mexico, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Trinidad and Tobago, and
Uruguay.
Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela 13
It also seeks to complement and strengthen the national and regional comprehensive
responses of governments, including through their national plans as well as the
proposed Quito Plan of Action, consistent with the principles outlined in the New
York.
Declaration for Refugees and Migrants, the Global Compact on Refugees and
its comprehensive response framework, as well as the Global Compact for Safe,
Orderly, and Regular Migration. Activities under the RMRP intend to bridge the
nexus between a humanitarian/emergency response and the longer-term
perspective to build resilience at the individual beneficiary as well as at
institutional level, all while firmly engraining the ‘leave no one behind’
commitment enshrined in the Sustainable Development Goals.
Host countries in the region have, thus far, maintained a commendable open-door
policy and demonstrated considerable solidarity towards Venezuelans. This
openness and solidarity is clearly reflected in the landmark Quito Declaration on
Human Mobility of Venezuelan Citizens in the Region,4 adopted in September 2018,
starting a regional initiative among governments of impacted countries. In the
second regional meeting on Human Mobility of Venezuelan Citizens in the
Region held in Quito on 22-23 November 2018, the present countries approved
the Action Plan of the Quito Process on Human Mobility of Venezuelan citizens in
the Region.5 The Action Plan outlined a number of regional priorities including:
• Articulation of regional coordination
through a Plan of Action that seeks
solutions on regularization;
• Establishment of regional
mechanisms for information
exchange;
• Facilitation of documentation
recognition;
• Inter-institutional coordination;
• Streamlining documentation
requirements for access to regular
status;
• Commitments to lower the cost of
applications for regular status;
• Labour integration and social
protection measures;
• Revision of implementation of
current regularization norms;
• Utilization of the virtual platform
established by the Regional Platform
to facilitate the exchange of
information;
• Regional actions against xenophobia
and discrimination as well as
trafficking and smuggling;
• Provision of assistance to persons in
vulnerable situations focusing on
children, persons with special needs
as well as persons with severe health
problems;
• Assessment of the impact of flows
and development of financial options;
• Inclusion of the situation in the
agendas of regional fora and
enhancement of resource mobilization
efforts.
4 Declaration of Quito on Human Mobility of Venezuelan Citizens in the Region (September 2018), available at:
https://www.cancilleria.gob.ec/wp-content/uploads/2018/09/declaracion_de_quito_en.pdf
5 Action Plan of the Quito Process on Human Mobility of Venezuelan citizens in the Region (November 2018), available at:
https://www.cancilleria.gob.ec/wp-content/uploads/2018/11/plan_de_accion_de_quito.pdf
14 Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela
International financial institutions, such as the World Bank (WB), the Inter-American
Development Bank (IADB) and the Development Bank of Latin America (CAF) are
already engaged in this process, providing support to assess the fiscal impact and
develop national response plans. These institutions are also contemplating the use of
specific financial facilities to support governments.
Population Groups,
Planning Figures and Assumptions
The continued outflow of refugees and migrants from Venezuela affects a variety of
population groups who are the beneficiaries of this plan:
1. Venezuelan refugees and migrants.
2. Refugees and migrants who were living in Venezuela and who are now returning
to their countries of origin or moving to a third country.
3. Stateless persons, in particular children born in a host country and who cannot
access citizenship of that country.
4. Host communities.
The Plan is based on the assumption that the same context and dynamics will continue
to prevail in Venezuela throughout 2019 and that the current rates of arrivals will
persist. Based on the governments’ figures, in particular the net migration balance, it
is estimated that there will be 5.3 million refugees and migrants from Venezuela by
the end of December 2019.
Some 3.6 million refugees and migrants from Venezuela in Latin America and the
Caribbean, 460,000 of them children, will be in need of assistance, including
protection, with no prospects for return in the short-to-medium term. This number of
people in need (PiN) includes those in the country of destination, those undertaking
pendular movement, and returnees.6 Refugees and migrants in transit are excluded
from the PiN figures, despite being among the beneficiaries, in order to avoid the same
person being counted on several occasions while in transit. The estimation of PiN was
calculated country-by-country, based on existing analyses of needs, collected through
various assessments and data sources, including government-led exercises. The PiN
numbers were validated during dedicated workshops by all partners.
6 In destination: individuals who have left their usual place of residence with the intention to remain in host country. Pendular
population: temporary and usually repeated population movements, which may represent a movement pattern between country
of origin and neighbouring country. Returnees in RMRP: an individual who has left Venezuela and returns to their country of
origin.
Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela 15
Of these, 2.2 million are directly targeted by this Plan. In addition, it is also estimated
that over half-a-million host community members will be targeted with some form of
assistance, including particularly vulnerable host community members. RMRP
partners analysed their operational and outreach capacities to estimate targets based
on a realistic assessment for scaling up the response in 2019.
It is also expected that over 1.4 million among the refugees and migrants from
Venezuela will be in transit through one or multiple countries before reaching their
intended or final destination. This population, and especially the most vulnerable
among them, will require assistance and protection throughout the journey. Therefore,
a projection of this population, at country level, will be added to countries’ planning
figures and targets when relevant.
The Plan envisages that the majority of the refugees and migrants from Venezuela are
expected to arrive in Colombia, with almost half of them remaining in the country and
the other half moving mainly to Ecuador, Peru, and to a lesser extent to countries of
the Southern Cone. Brazil will continue to receive a substantial number of refugees
and migrants; while the Caribbean, Central America and Mexico will see a smaller
number of arrivals, either directly or through secondary movements.
Rumichaca, border of Ecuador with Colombia. Hundreds of refugees and migrants from Venezuela
queuing at the border post. ©IOM/ Cristian Méndez
16 Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela
KEY PLANNING ASSUMPTIONS INCLUDE:
• Refugee and migrant outflows from Venezuela will continue at the same pace in
2019;
• Major recipient countries will continue to be Brazil, Colombia, Ecuador, and Peru;
• States, with some exceptions, will continue allowing Venezuelans access to their
territories, and, in line with the principle of non-refoulement, will continue providing
access to asylum and alternative forms of protection;
• States will continue providing pathways for regular stay, generally without
restrictions nor limitations to access basic services. However, in some states,
provisional documentation policies and high application fees may hinder access to
regular stay;
• Countries will require continued institutional strengthening in light of overstretched
services due to the scale of current and foreseen arrivals;
• Numbers of asylum-seekers will continue to increase albeit with variations in
application across countries. Some states will apply the expanded regional refugee
definition of the 1984 Cartagena Declaration on Refugees, while others will apply
the refugee definition of the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees
and its 1967 Protocol;
• The number of Venezuelans without a regular status will continue to rise at least
until the implementation of the Quito Plan of Action, and thus creating barriers to
accessing rights and services in receiving countries;
• Venezuelans, with and without regular status, will demonstrate heightened needs
and increased levels of vulnerability;
• Women and girls will continue to be disproportionately affected in this crisis,
especially in terms of risks of Gender-Based Violence (GBV) and human
trafficking;
• Profiling and registration systems will be instituted and/or strengthened, and
supported;
• A significant number of returns of refugees and migrants back to Venezuela are
not envisaged in the short or medium term;
• States will recognise growing risks of statelessness and, in conjunction with RMRP
partners, take political and legislative steps to prevent and reduce these risks;
• States will support efforts to address discrimination and xenophobia, including
through awareness campaigns, strengthened media relations and outreach, and
social media activity.
International protection considerations, according to the refugee criteria contained in
the 1951 Convention and its 1967 Protocol and the 1984 Cartagena Declaration, have
become apparent for a significant proportion of those leaving Venezuela, even though
not all departures are triggered by refugee-related reasons. Moreover, the situation
also affects refugees and migrants in Venezuela, many of whom are returning to their
Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela 17
Regular Migration, which was finalized by UN Member States on July 2018,
specifically intends to reduce the risks and vulnerabilities migrants face at different
stages of migration by respecting, protecting and fulfilling their human rights, and
providing them with care and assistance.
Overarching Population’s
Needs across the Region
The expected displacement in 2019 will further challenge the ability of host
governments to respond to the influx and will reduce the absorption capacity of local
communities. While migration and asylum governance in the region are
well established, competent authorities generally do not have the capacity to deal
with the unprecedented scale of the population flows and the diversity of
destinations. Furthermore, authorities, at national and local levels, have limited
human, financial, technical, and organizational resources to guarantee the new
arrivals adequate access to basic services.
The most critical need for refugees and migrants from Venezuela is access to
a predictable regular status and documentation framework, which would allow them
to effectively enjoy their rights, access social services and the labour market. Scaling
up reception and support mechanisms, shelter interventions, as well as access to
basic services, including food and other humanitarian assistance, especially in
border and urban areas, are also pressing needs. In addition, reception,
assistance and information centres along known routes used by refugees and
migrants will be a priority area. These services are critical to ensure the
immediate identification of vulnerabilities and needs as well as to support
efforts for efficient referrals to appropriate services, including, where feasible,
ensuring and enhancing access to national systems.
While refugees and migrants from Venezuela have, to varying degrees, been able to
access the labour market and other services provided by states, including health care,
nutritional support, education, and social security, these services are increasingly
becoming overstretched. In this context, the needs of host communities also have to
be addressed.
The lack of or limited access to formal schooling is leaving many Venezuelan children
without education, exacerbating their exposure to various protection risks, including
negative coping mechanisms. Limitations in access to health services, including
medication and treatment for chronic conditions, puts at risk a high percentage of
Venezuelans arriving in host countries with serious medical conditions. This also
country of origin, as well as third-country nationals living in Venezuela, stateless
persons, and host communities. The text for the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and
18 Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela
includes the need for free access to reproductive health, nutrition, family planning, and
mental health services.
An increasing number of arrivals of families with children, unaccompanied and
separated children (UASC), but also elderly and people with disabilities, is expected
to continue next year. Recent monitoring activities reveal a worrying increase in the
vulnerability of refugees and migrants, affecting in particular children and women on
the move, including single or young mothers, and pregnant women, some of them
teenagers. There are inadequate shelters or private spaces at the entry points and
along the route for resting, showering, changing and breastfeeding. In addition,
pregnant and lactating women have limited or no access to nutritional supplements,
and quality pre- and post-natal care. Children and youth on the move, are particularly
at risk of being recruited by armed groups or criminal elements near the border or
along the route.
Furthermore, as of 2018, an estimated 7,700 refugees and migrants from Venezuela
living with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) are in need of life-saving antiretroviral
treatment in host countries. They also require consistent access to targeted HIV
prevention information, education and communication, voluntary counselling, testing
and condoms.
Successful socio-economic and cultural integration is beneficial not only for refugees
and migrants from Venezuela, but also for those communities hosting them. Providing
support to members of host communities in these processes decreases social
tensions and establishes constructive engagement between communities. This
includes activities and campaigns geared towards mitigating rising discrimination,
xenophobia and negative perceptions towards the presence of refugees and migrants.
These activities will go hand-in-hand with establishing constructive engagement and
interactions within receiving communities.
Furthermore, refugees and migrants without a regular status that would ensure access
to rights and services, are often obliged to take irregular routes to access safety. They
are particularly vulnerable to exploitation, including labour exploitation, as well as
violence, human trafficking, sexual abuse, resorting to survival sex and recruitment by
non-state armed groups, often in insecure border areas rife with criminal and armed
groups. Increasing incidents of GBV and human trafficking are among the key
protection concerns, primarily impacting women and girls but also men and boys, and
vulnerable minorities such as lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex (LGBTI)
persons. Women engaging in survival sex, sexually exploited, and trafficked are
reported as key concerns in most of the countries, especially in the Caribbean and in
border areas with Venezuela. More efforts will be exerted to identify, prevent,
and respond to instances of GBV. The specific situation of indigenous communities
Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela 19
is also contemplated in this Plan and interventions will need to factor in a culturally
and ethnically sensitive approach that takes into account their specific needs.
The situation of refugees and migrants from Venezuela in transit is a major feature of
this population movement, exposing them to multiple risks, amplifying their preexisting
vulnerabilities, and increasing the need for protection. Specific response
strategies and activities will be formulated for this group.
Regional Response
Strategy and Priorities
The RMRP seeks to respond to the population’s needs in a holistic and comprehensive
manner, in line with governments’ priorities, complementing their respective response
plans, within the framework of regionalized response and coordination mechanisms.
In line with these national priorities, partners in this regional plan have developed a
response structured around four areas of intervention (AoI). For each one, the
following regional strategic outcomes have been defined.
Pacaraima, border of Brazil with Venezuela. Arrival of refugees and migrants from Venezuela.
©IOM/ Amanda Nero
Area of Intervention Strategic outcomes
1. Direct emergency
assistance
Refugees and migrants are provided with life-saving
goods and services
2. Protection Refugees and migrants enjoy rights and protection
3. Socio economic and
cultural integration
Refugees and migrants are socially, economically, and
culturally integrated in empowered communities
4. Strengthening the
capacity of host
government
Government institutions capacity to manage situations
of refugees and migrants from Venezuela is
strengthened
20 Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela
The assistance and protection of those who are particularly vulnerable will be at the
centre of the emergency response, with community-based protection as the preferred
operational modality. At the same time, however, a forward-looking lens will be applied
to ensure socio-economic and cultural integration, as well as longer-term initiatives to
build the resilience of refugees and migrants from Venezuela, bringing developmentoriented
and private sector, faith-based organizations, and international financial
institutions into the fold.
The Plan will be underpinned by a strong and robust accountability framework,
including feedback and complaints mechanisms as well as a strong focus on
prevention of sexual abuse and exploitation, servicing both refugees and migrants as
well as host communities. Their voices will inform the analysis, as well as decisions
on assistance and protection responses, using participatory methodologies, in an age,
gender, and diversity-sensitive manner.
The priority elements of the regional response seek to respond to the regional priorities
established by governments and include:
• Provision of emergency assistance and basic services to new arrivals. This will
include food and non-food items, emergency shelter, health and nutrition,
education, and legal assistance.
• Collection and analysis of data on human mobility and emerging trends will
be enhanced to inform both the humanitarian and development actors as well as
government bodies. Analyses and generation of information products will be also
harmonized across the region to better understand the volume, specific needs,
characteristics and routes of changing flows of refugees and migrants for planning,
operational response and advocacy purposes. The Regional and National
Coordination Platforms will develop information exchange protocols whereby data
collected at country-level is consolidated in a comprehensive manner, ensuring a
data driven response.
• Protection monitoring support will be scaled up in border areas and at key
strategic points along the displacement route, and partners will undertake
advocacy on this basis. Review activities will focus on access to territory, fair and
efficient asylum procedures and complementary forms of protection, access to
regular status, access to rights and services conferred under national laws (in
particular for the most vulnerable), profiling of people on the move, and early
warning.
• Registration and documentation support will be provided to different countries
to establish inter-operable registration and documentation systems, including at
regional level.
Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela 21
• Strengthening of access to territory, asylum systems, regularization
processes, and documentation, through quality assurance initiatives and the
implementation of fair and efficient migration policies, while also promoting the
introduction of legal forms of stay for Venezuelans that include protection
safeguards in line with international standards. Regional and sub-regional
harmonization of normative instruments will also be pursued in line with
government-led regional initiatives.
• Protection responses for persons at risk and/or with specific needs will be
strengthened, in particular children at risk including UASC; indigenous
communities; elderly people; pregnant and lactating women; LGBTI; people with
disabilities; people living with HIV, and others. The Regional and National
Platforms will map existing support spaces and will harmonize minimum
operational standards required to run these spaces. Support spaces will be
connected in a network throughout the region as a critical element to communicate
effectively with communities.
• Prevention and response to GBV will require strengthened and consolidated
regional measures, including through the support of the Regional and National
Platforms, to reduce exposure of women, men, boys and girls to the risk of GBV,
through dissemination of information, identification activities, standard operating
procedures, referral pathways, and delivery of life-saving services.
• Child protection and increased access to education are key priorities. Children
and youth, including those traveling without family members or care-givers, will
have access to protection, appropriate care, and inclusive quality education
services. A community-based approach will be applied, in conjunction with
specialized case management, to ensure access to education and social services
and protection according to the best interests of the child principle.
• Communicating with communities (CwC) and increasing accountability will
be at the core of the response. The Plan aims to enhance refugees and migrants’
awareness of their rights and responsibilities, available services, as well as to
gather feedback on protection risks, coping mechanisms, and response priorities.
The Regional Platform will develop an inter-agency message bank to harmonize
key messages. It will also map existing tools, such as use of social media and
mobile applications that enable people to geolocate available services. Legal
orientation on access to procedures and administrative procedures, in addition to
specialized legal aid services, will form an important component of CwC activities.
• Awareness and solidarity campaigns as well as integration activities will be
stepped up to combat discrimination and xenophobia towards Venezuelans and
promote social cohesion and longer-term relations with host communities,
especially in fragile communities where there are significant population influxes.
The Regional and National Platforms will coordinate anti-xenophobia campaigns.
• Self-reliance will be fostered by maximizing opportunities for socio-economic and
cultural inclusion of refugees and migrants, enhancing livelihood opportunities as
well as ensuring a focus on investing in the resilience of host communities. This
will include advocacy for the inclusion of refugees and migrants in national
development plans and the early engagement of the private sector, as well as faithbased
organizations and development actors, in recognition of the need for longterm
planning.
• Enhancing of support and improving access to public services and social
protection mechanisms, including health care, education, water, hygiene and
sanitation. Delivery of assistance will be channelled through local and national
service providers, where appropriate, including through multipurpose cash
assistance.
• Strengthening capacities at regional, national and local level will be prioritized.
Efforts will continue with relevant authorities to support preparedness measures
(including for contingencies) and rights-based systems and policies ensuring that
protection space is guaranteed and the provision of the basic needs of all refugees
and migrants from Venezuela is enhanced.
Implementation of the RMRP:
Coordination, Monitoring and Reporting
The regional and national interagency coordination platforms will serve as the main
fora to monitor progress on the implementation and strategic direction of the RMRP,
review and analyse changes in the context and ensure coherence in the overall
response.
In addition, the work of the regional platform will be focused on seven cross-cutting
priority fields of work, including anti-xenophobia campaigns, communicating
with communities/communication for development, communication and public
information, integration, information management, GBV, and support spaces. For
each of these areas, partner agencies have developed a strategy and a work plan,
to strengthen a coherent and regional response and for which financial requirements
are included in the Plan.
22 Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela
Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela 23
This Response Plan includes programmes and activities that may be reflected in
appeals issued by individual agencies. These activities are included – even
when funded – in order to present a comprehensive picture of protection and
assistance needs.
By participating in this Plan, organizations commit to engaging in the Regional and/or
National Platforms, adhering to agreed standards, and providing regular reporting on
their activities and funding received throughout the year.
For continuous monitoring of activities in the RMRP, a robust and efficient monitoring
framework will track progress towards AoIs at the national and regional levels
with frequent, publicly available, reporting. Progress in meeting strategic objectives
per AoI will disaggregate target populations by gender and age, with
appropriate georeferentiation per country and sub-region. Information collected will
be analysed for strategic, operational, and tactical decision-making and to inform
advocacy efforts and programmatic adjustments during implementation.
For continuous monitoring of financial information, internationally recognized
humanitarian financial tracking systems will be used to track and evaluate financial
contributions per activity in the plan. Financial status will be analysed against
programmatic implementation to inform advocacy efforts.
Details on the response to the situation of refugees and migrants from Venezuela can
be found on the web portal of the Regional Platform at r4v.info.
24 Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela
BRAZIL REFUGEE
AND MIGRANT
RESPONSE PLAN
Brazil
180,000
Refugees and
Migrants in Need
95,150
Refugees and
Migrants Targeted
55,000 USD 56M
Financial
Requirements
Pacaraima D
BOLIVIA
BRAZIL
PERU
ARGENTINA
CHILE
COLOMBIA
ECUADOR
PARAGUAY
SURINAME
URUGUAY
Brasília
VENEZUELA, BOLIVARIAN
REPUBLIC OF
Porto Alegre
Cuiabá
Boa Vista
Salvador
São Paulo
Rio de Janeiro
Manaus
D
Tancredo Neves
±
Regional Population Movements 20
RMRP Partners
in Task Force for the Refugees
and Migrants Response
Platform (TF – RMRP)
Target Host
Community
Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela 27
Introduction –
Background and Achievements
Brazil has seen a significant influx of refugees and migrants from Venezuela crossing
primarily through the northern states of the country. Since 2016, the number of
refugees and migrants from Venezuela has substantially increased, to over 88,900
refugees currently living in the country.7 Of these, over 65,600 Venezuelans have
applied for asylum in Brazil and over 23,300 have acquired a two-year residence
permit to stay in the country, through a resolution approved in March 2017.8 As of
November 2018, there was an average of 400 to 500 refugees and migrants from
Venezuela entering Brazil per day, many of whom arrive in desperate conditions and
in urgent need of humanitarian assistance.
The federal government began responding early on and engaged the United Nations
(UN) System, Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs) and civil society to help
strengthen and coordinate appropriate strategies. Since 2017, UN agencies and
partners have complemented the government response and have incorporated a wide
range of activities for all refugees and migrants entering Brazil. Some of the main
achievements were the establishment of proper reception and documentation centres,
the provision of emergency shelters and basic services, the distribution of Non-Food
Items (NFIs), and the implementation of integration activities, including voluntary
relocation within the country.
In Brazil, the border State of Roraima is the main entry point for refugees and migrants
coming from Venezuela and the only accessible state by land. The State of Roraima
has a population of over 522,600 inhabitants, with a per capita income of
approximately USD 270, placing it among the poorest states in Brazil. The challenging
social situation and the lack of resources are influencing the conditions for violence
and unrest in the state, as well as the social tensions between the host community
and new arrivals. Due to its isolated location and with the poorest public service
network, the situation has only been exacerbated after the arrival of refugees and
migrants from Venezuela.
In order to alleviate pressure in the State of Roraima, reduce the number of
Venezuelans living on the streets, and facilitate their socio-economic integration in
the host cities, the Federal Government launched a plan for a voluntary
relocation strategy to other Brazilian states.9 Amid growing protests among host
communities,
7 Statistics were provided by the Federal Police on 30 October 2018. Asylum statistics are up to 30 September 2018 and residency
permit data up to 8 September 2018.
8 Normative Resolution n. 126/2017 by the National Immigration Council (CNI), later updated by Inter-ministerial Decree n.
9/2018
9 Solution only available for those of non-indigenous origin. A separate strategic approach will apply for the indigenous displaced
community of Warao, through peaceful coexistence and local integration into public service schemes.
28 Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela
the Federal Government scaled up its internal relocation strategy with a commitment
to relocate an average of 1,000 Venezuelans per month. To build on ongoing efforts,
2019 will focus on the humanitarian response, documenting and registering new
arrivals, and the voluntary relocation process.
• As of October 2018, 5,200 refugees and migrants from Venezuela in Roraima are
living in temporary shelters in Boa Vista and Pacaraima, and the demand for
Boa Vista, Brazil. Refugees and migrants from Venezuela board a Brazilian Air Force plane in Boa Vista, Roraima
State, to be relocated to other cities across Brazil. The programme launched in April 2018 by the Federal
Government facilitates voluntary relocation of Venezuelans to other parts of Brazil, to alleviate pressure from
Roraima State and help refugees and migrants access improved living conditions, work, accommodation, and
integration mechanisms. ©UNHCR/ Luiz Fernando Godinho
Joint Needs Analysis
RMRP partners in the country have already carried out rounds of assessments to
systematize the mapping of the most pressing needs. It is projected that there will be
approximately 190,000 refugees and migrants from Venezuela in Brazil by the end of
2019, including an estimated 86,500 new arrivals over the coming year. It is therefore
important to capture the ever-changing needs of the most vulnerable populations.
Around 180,000 refugees and migrants will be in need of assistance in
Brazil. Additionally, some 110,000 people in host communities are also considered to
be in need of assistance.
Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela 29
housing has surpassed local capacity and structures.10 The percentage of
refugees and migrants from Venezuela interviewed during data collection
exercises, living outside of shelters increased to 23 percent from February to June
2018.11 In addition, 37 per cent of the interviewed population living outside of
reception sites claimed to eat less than three meals per day. Moreover, 90 per cent
of surveyed refugees and migrants from Venezuela living in Boa Vista in the street
or without a solid roof have no access to sanitation facilities, and 66 per cent live
in places without access to water.12 Likewise, focus group discussions conducted
in August 2018 found that the majority of refugees and migrants from Venezuela
are living in precarious housing situations, such as public spaces, tents, open air,
disused public buildings, or abandoned/damaged houses, among others.13
• Core protection needs include access to asylum and a regular status, as well
as registration, which provides refugees and migrants from Venezuela with access
to basic services and integration opportunities. Additionally, at the reception and
documentation centres, Venezuelans have requested more information on the
differences between migration modalities (i.e. asylum and temporary residence) so
that they can make informed decisions. Information about the institutions and
services they can access in case of violation of their rights, particularly on labour
and immigration, is also needed.
• In June 2018, 32 per cent of surveyed refugees and migrants from Venezuela
indicated that they have suffered a type of violence (verbal, physical, or sexual)
after arrival in Roraima, due to their nationality, sexual orientation, and/or gender.14
Femicides in the state have increased 139 per cent in the last five years, with
widespread impunity and a lack of proper response mechanisms being the main
challenges.15 Women and children remain the most at risk of gender-based
violence (GBV), including human trafficking, sexual abuse, and exploitation. Child
labour is still prevalent across the city, with the most common types being begging,
street-selling, and plastic waste collection.16
• Many refugees and migrants from Venezuela are facing significant challenges
accessing formal employment. In Boa Vista and Pacaraima, the most common
type of employment was reportedly informal or irregular daily work as of June
2018.17 Whilst the difficulties in finding employment are partially due to a lack of
10 UNHCR’s registration and case management system (ProGres) and other sources.
11 IOM Brazil Displacement Tracking Matrix (DTM) Report Round 2 (May – June 2018), interviewed over 3,700 people.
12 REACH-UNHCR Vulnerability Assessment (August 2018).
13 REACH-UNHCR focus group discussions conducted in August 2018 with over 190 refugees and migrants from Venezuela
living outside shelters.
14 IOM Brazil DTM Report Round 2 (May – June 2018).
15 Human Rights Watch Report (June 2017), available at: https://www.hrw.org/pt/report/2017/06/21/305484, and Helena Martins
(27 August 2017), Agencia Brasil, available at: http://agenciabrasil.ebc.com.br/direitos-humanos/noticia/2017-08/taxa-defeminicidios-
no-brasil-e-quinta-maior-do-mundo .
16 REACH-UNHCR results of focus group discussions (August 2018).
17 IOM Brazil DTM Report Round 2 (May – June 2018).
30 Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela
appropriate job opportunities in the city, there is also a perceived discrimination
that is compounded by the language barrier. Given these challenges, refugees and
migrants have expressed a growing interest in the relocation programme. Initial
consultations have seen positive results (43 per cent were able to find a job within
the first two months). However, no system is yet in place at the national level to
monitor and evaluate the impact and results.
• Access to rights and social services also remains a challenge due to the
overburden on the local system in Roraima. For example, 32 per cent of the
interviewed refugees and migrants from Venezuela did not have access to health
services.18 The reasons for which they are unable to access health services include
a lack of local capacity to provide services and language barriers. Furthermore, 55
per cent of the interviewed refugee and migrant households from Venezuela with
school-age children have reported that their children are not attending school.19
Depending on the date of arrival, children must wait for the school year to finish to
apply for placement, which has exposed them to child labour and protection risks.
• Besides local tensions related to overstretched basic services, media headlines
have increasingly highlighted threats and crimes involving refugees and migrants
from Venezuela in Roraima State. This has contributed to the shrinking of space
for peaceful coexistence between refugees and migrants and the host
community. In August and September 2018, a number of xenophobic incidents
occurred in Roraima increasing tensions between the two communities, and in
some cases causing physical violence towards refugees and migrants from
Venezuela.
• Brazil has high standards of migrant and refugee protection, with advanced laws
that include the expanded definition of refugee, safeguards against refoulement,
alternative migratory pathways, and access to legal and fundamental rights in a
non-discriminatory manner. However, despite the enabling legal frameworks,
implementation challenges exist, caused by the lack of human resources for
border management and documentation procedures; challenges in the
coordination between stakeholders, especially from different levels of government;
availability of disaggregated and up-to-date data on migratory flows, as well as
data-sharing mechanisms.
18 IOM Brazil DTM Report Round 2 (May – June 2018).
19 REACH-UNHCR Information Needs Assessment (November 2018).
Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela 31
Areas of Intervention,
Country Objectives and Priorities
The strategic objectives and priorities guiding the response in Brazil are defined under
each of the below four areas of intervention. Over 95,000 refugees and migrants from
Venezuela, as well as some 55,000 host community members, are expected to be
reached through interventions under this Plan.
DIRECT EMERGENCY ASSISTANCE
• Humanitarian and development partners will continue to support refugees,
migrants and host communities in vulnerable situations with the provision of
basic needs. The distribution of food will be provided through different
implementation modalities, including food vouchers, direct food delivery, and the
provision of food baskets, targeting vulnerable persons within and outside of the
shelters. NFI packages will include sets of hygiene items, including for women and
girls, and other basic utensils for daily needs. Other basic services include water,
sanitation and hygiene (WASH), and health.
• Partners will provide refugees and migrants with humanitarian transportation to
their final destination within Brazil, with special attention given to vulnerable
groups, to screening and reception centres to facilitate their access to
documentation and basic services, including health and hygiene.
• Partners will provide shelter and accommodation support, including through a
variety of temporary modalities and rental subsidies.
• Data collection and information management systems and mechanisms will
continue to be strengthened and broadened to incorporate inter-agency
assessment tools, in addition to agency-specific processes. Joint assessments will
aim at identifying specific urgent needs of all refugee and migrant populations,
particularly women and girls, and including indigenous communities to inform
evidence-based interventions.
PROTECTION
• Protection monitoring as well as the existing protection response through the
identification, referral, monitoring and access to services mechanisms of
vulnerable groups. The protection response will provide information and
guidance on rights, programmes, services, and support networks. Partners will
produce and distribute bilingual information kits and other communicating with
communities (CwC) materials on various thematic areas of protection identified by
the population, including accompanied and unaccompanied children (UASC),
32 Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela
adolescents and youth, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), GBV, human
trafficking, access to rights and services, and complaint mechanisms, among
others.
• Partners will enhance access to registration, regularization and
documentation on Brazilian territory, taking into account the needs of specific
groups and in accordance with the due process under Brazilian law.
• Development and improvement of support spaces and activities for people with
specific protection needs, such as lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and
intersex persons (LGBTI), indigenous populations, and children, facilitating their
access to services, psychosocial and legal assistance, among others. Activities in
this area of intervention will also include support to the growing number of cases
of abuse and exploitation in the labour market.
n
SOCIO-ECONOMIC AND CULTURAL INTEGRATION
• RMRP partners will continue to support the scale-up of the government voluntary
relocation strategy to include activities from the point of origin to the destination.
These services include transportation and accompaniment, family reunification,
temporary shelters, as well as cash grants for rental support and basic needs.
Integration activities will also support those in need of access to social security,
financial services, health, nutrition, and psychosocial support. Access-toeducation
activities will promote the inclusion of school-aged refugee and
migrant children in the Brazilian education system. Various initiatives will enhance
access to livelihoods, including: financial services, formal employment, and selfemployment.
Advocacy for diploma recognition, the provision of technical,
entrepreneurial and vocational courses, and Portuguese language classes will be
important activities to promote socio-cultural integration.
• Social cohesion will be promoted between refugee and migrant and host
communities, as well as among the different displaced groups in urban areas, by
coordinating and collaborating with partners, working on socio-economic
integration of refugees and migrants across multiple sectors. Programmes and
campaigns to address xenophobia and discrimination will be strengthened with a
joint approach, to support a favourable protection environment.
CAPACITY STRENGTHENING
• Assisting the Brazilian government is a central component of the Plan, crosscutting
through all other areas of intervention. This includes the promotion of
training and awareness-raising activities with institutions dealing with migration and
asylum issues through a rights-based and participatory approach.
Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela 33
• Training and technical assistance on gender equality and women’s rights in
humanitarian action will be provided for first responders including to security, army,
justice and social assistance sectors, as well as UN agencies, NGOs and
civil society organizations.
• Advocacy and support aimed at strengthening the national
protection framework will be conducted in close collaboration with UN agencies
and the civil society in inter-sectoral coordination mechanisms. Moreover, the
activities under this area of intervention provide technical support to the host
institutions in sectors that improve the provision of basic services to refugees and
migrants, including health, nutrition, education, water and sanitation.
• Activities will also focus on strengthening the government’s capacity to
collect, monitor, and analyse population needs and the provision of
services, based on the local capacities of the host community. Therefore,
information management plays an essential role at all levels in the
delivery of a coordinated response. Improved information management
systems as well as inter-institutional and inter-sectoral coordination will
support regional, federal, state and municipal decision-making processes
affecting refugees and migrants.
INDIGENOUS POPULATIONS
A significant group among refugees and migrants from Venezuela is comprised of
indigenous populations. Specifically, the Warao indigenous group who originate from
northern Venezuela. There are currently Warao groups in the cities of Pacaraima, Boa Vista,
Manaus, Santarém, Altamira, and Belém do Pará. In the State of Roraima, two of the
shelters are hosting exclusively Warao population, given cultural differences between
indigenous and non-indigenous populations. In August 2018, over 1,300 Warao persons
were hosted in these shelters, including some 28 per cent children. In Warao communities,
particularly amongst women, many speak only their native language, which impedes their
access to basic services. During the past year, humanitarian partners have supported
Warao in the shelters with income-generating activities. RMRP partners will continue to
provide support to indigenous populations during 2019 to ensure that they are included in
response activities for refugees and migrants from Venezuela arriving in Brazil, and that
their needs are addressed in a culturally and ethnically sensitive approach.
Boa Vista, Brazil. Asylum-seeker
Celia Perez, 40, weaves baskets
with other Warao women at
Pintolandia Shelter in Boa Vista,
northern Brazil. She came to Brazil
from San Felix, Venezuela with her
husband and six children 11
months ago. Around 700 other
Waraos are staying in the shelter.
© UNHCR/Reynesson
Damasceno
34 Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela
Summary of
Objectives for 2019
DIRECT EMERGENCY ASSISTANCE
OBJECTIVE 1
Assist refugees and migrants in vulnerable situations with their basic needs.
OBJECTIVE 2
Collect and maintain disaggregated data and information systems, including the
analysis of movements and needs of refugees, migrants, and the host community.
PROTECTION
OBJECTIVE 1
Provide access for refugees and migrants to information and guidance with regards
to rights, programs, services, and support networks.
OBJECTIVE 2
Ensure refugees and migrants have access to territory, asylum, migratory
regularization processes, and documentation, taking into account the needs of
specific groups and in accordance with the due process of Brazilian law.
OBJECTIVE 3
Ensure vulnerable groups have access to and are referred to protection
mechanisms and receive attention, and follow-up from the relevant stakeholders.
SOCIO-ECONOMIC AND CULTURAL INTEGRATION
OBJECTIVE 1
Reinforce socio-economic integration, through relocation, access to livelihoods,
financial services, formal employment, and self-employment.
OBJECTIVE 2
Ensure refugees and migrants have access to lifelong learning and education, social
security, and health.
OBJECTIVE 3
Promote peaceful coexistence of refugees, migrants, and host communities, in nondiscriminatory
and culturally inclusive environments.
CAPACITY STRENGTHENING
OBJECTIVE 1
Strengthen state capacity to manage the border under a rights-based framework for
the regularization of migratory and asylum procedures.
OBJECTIVE 2
Improve information management by the State, as well as inter-institutional and
inter-sectoral coordination in regional, federal, state and municipal decision-making
processes.
OBJECTIVE 3
Support and strengthen federal, state and municipal institutions and protection
systems, while including civil society, migrants and refugees, as well as the host
communities at all stages of the development of legislation and public policies.
Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela 35
Partnership and Coordination
The Government of Brazil has led the emergency response in the country, issuing on
15 February 2018 a Provisional Executive Act (known as Medida Provisória # 820
(MP)) and establishing a Federal Emergency Assistance Committee to address the
emergency assistance needs of refugees and migrants from Venezuela. Since 2017,
joint mechanisms have been in place to ensure coordination among key stakeholders,
including public authorities, UN agencies, NGOs and civil society organizations,
through three levels.
Firstly, the Federal Government-led Emergency Assistance Committee runs a
situation room in Brasilia and oversees activity planning and implementation. Three
sub-groups have been established to facilitate implementation and monitoring,
focusing respectively on (1) reception, identification, and screening; (2) health; (3)
voluntary relocation. Some UN agencies participate in thematic sessions of the
groups.
Moreover, the UN Coordination Team created a Venezuela Task Force with all
agencies working in the emergency response, in order to address the most pressing
issues and support the Government of Brazil at all levels, to strengthen the
humanitarian response, ensure a rights-based approach, and promote the centrality
of protection of Venezuelan refugees and migrants. The UN Venezuela Task Force
will be strengthened and restructured into the Task Force for the Refugee and
Migrants Response Platform Brazil (TF – RMRP Brazil). This group will include a wider
range of stakeholders, including NGOs and civil society partners.
Additionally, at the local level in Roraima State, UN agencies, government institutions
as well as international and national NGOs have established multiple forums to
strengthen the coordination and impact of the humanitarian response in the ground.
According to the needs, different working groups were set up to coordinate on specific
thematic areas of the response, such as gender, children and youth, indigenous
populations, NFI, labour, and emergency reception sites.
36 Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela
COLOMBIA REFUGEE
AND MIGRANT
RESPONSE PLAN
Colombia
1,114,266
Refugees and
Migrants in Need
640,000
Refugees and
Migrants Targeted
300,000
Target Host
Community
USD 315M
Financial
Requirements
D
D
D
D
Paraguachón
Villa del
Rosario
Arauca
San Miguel
Bogotá
Caracas
Medellin
Barranquilla
Bucaramanga
Ipiales
Cali
VENEZUELA,
BOLIVARIAN
REPUBLIC OF
ECUADOR PERÚ
±
Regional Population Movements
34
RMRP Partners
in Inter-Agency Mixed
Migration Flows Group
(GIFMM)
Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela 39
Introduction –
Background and Achievements
The impact of the outflow of refugees and migrants from Venezuela is felt most keenly
in Colombia. Across the 2,200-kilometer common border with seven formal and
hundreds of informal crossing points, Colombia has been receiving over 50 per cent
of refugees and migrants from Venezuela, including those who remain in the country
as well as those who transit through the country for onward movement. Colombia is
also receiving a significant number of its nationals returning from Venezuela, some of
them having stayed in Venezuela for decades. The situation in Colombia is indeed
complex, with different types of population movements taking place simultaneously,
including pendular movements in the border area.20
The arrival of refugees and migrants from Venezuela into Colombia has grown
exponentially over the last few years. The number of those staying in the country rose
from less than 39,000 at the end of 2015, to 1,032,000 at the end of September 2018,
an increase of almost 2,550 per cent.21 Similarly, the number of Venezuelans transiting
through Colombia towards Ecuador and onwards increased from 14,000 in 2015, to
511,000 in the first nine months of 2018, an increase of 3,550 per cent. In addition,
there are over 300,000 Colombian returnees,22 with many of them requiring support
for their socio-economic inclusion and safe reintegration.
20 Pendular movement: temporary and usually repeated population movements, which may represent a movement pattern
between country of origin and neighbouring country.
21 Data from Migración Colombia, published on 1 November 2018, which provides figures as of 31 of September 2018,
available at: http://www.migracioncolombia.gov.co/index.php/es/prensa/infografias/infografias-2018/8693-migracion-venezolana
22 Data from World Bank “Migración desde Colombia – Impactos y estrategia de respuesta en el corto y mediano plazo”
(November 2018), page 15, available at: https://reliefweb.int/report/colombia/migraci-n-desde-venezuela-colombia-impactos-yestrategia-
de-respuesta-en-el-corto-y
Cúcuta, border of Colombia with Venezuela. Thousands of refugees and migrants from Venezuela continue to
enter Colombia daily, through the main regular entry point, crossing the Simon Bolivar International Bridge.
©UNHCR/ Santiago Escobar-Jaramillo
40 Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela
As the number of Venezuelans has increased, the population is settling not only along
the border, but also across the country, including in large urban centres. Therefore,
refugees and migrants from Venezuela, as well as Colombian returnees, sometimes
find themselves in areas where the impact of armed conflicts are still felt.
The scale and complexity of this movement, coupled with the fact that the country has
traditionally not received large numbers of refugees and migrants, has created
considerable challenges, but has also been met with a generous response by the
authorities. The Government of Colombia has taken commendable steps to respond
to the situation and has called on humanitarian partners and the international
community to support its efforts. In 2017, Colombia created a Special Stay Permit
(PEP, by its acronym in Spanish), which benefited Venezuelans who entered through
formal border points, with a total of 181,000 issued by February 2018. Between April
and June of the same year, the national authorities registered more than 442,000
Venezuelans who were irregularly in the country through the largest and fastest
registration process in its history (process known by its Spanish acronym, RAMV).
Those registered through the RAMV were given the opportunity to regularize their
status by acquiring a PEP.23 The PEP allows these individuals to remain in Colombia
for up to two years with access to basic rights, including employment, health, and
education.
In addition to having granted PEPs to over 415,000 Venezuelans by the end of
September 2018, a number that could reach around 620,000 by the end of the year,24
Colombia has also opened two rounds for requesting Border Mobility Cards (TMF –
by its acronym in Spanish), a permit held by some 1.5 million Venezuelans as of
November 2018,25 which allows them to enter Colombia for up to seven days. The
progressive expansion of basic rights and provision of basic services to Venezuelans,
such as emergency healthcare and basic schooling, has also accelerated in 2018.
Members of the national coordination platform (the Inter-Agency Mixed Migration
Flows Group – GIFMM, by its acronym in Spanish), led by the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and the International Organization for Migration
(IOM) and composed of 38 United Nations (UN) agencies, Non-Governmental
Organizations (NGOs) and the Red Cross Movement, have stepped up operations to
respond to the growing needs of refugees and migrants from Venezuela, including
Colombian returnees, as well as host communities, and seeking to support and
complement the State’s response. These efforts range from emergency response to
23 This is the third round of PEPs being granted by the Government of Colombia to this population. Under the first one (PEP –I)
over 68,870 people were granted the permit, the second round (PEP-II) reached over 112,600, and the third round (PEP-III) over
233,800 people, as of 31 of September 2018.
24 This includes the Venezuelans granted PEPs in the three rounds and those were registered in the RAMV who are still eligible
to apply for PEPs.
25 Data from Migración Colombia, published on 13 November 2018, available at:
http://www.migracioncolombia.gov.co/index.php/es/prensa/infografias/infografias-2018/8693-migracion-venezolana
Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela 41
humanitarian, basic and protection needs, as well as actions to promote integration,
social cohesion, and strengthening the capacity of the government.
In 2018, refugees and migrants from Venezuela and host communities have been
provided with critical aid, including food assistance and recovery of agricultural
production, hygiene kits, vaccinations, humanitarian transportation, and assistance in
transit centres. Some tens of thousands of Venezuelans have received individual
orientation during and after RAMV and the issuance of the PEP. Attention and
Orientation Points, legal clinics, child-friendly spaces, and temporary schooling
facilities were established throughout the country. Lastly, millions of Colombians have
been reached through anti-discrimination/anti-xenophobia campaigns.
Nevertheless, further efforts are needed in areas related to protection, including
ensuring access to territory as well as protection against refoulement, ensuring
adequate safeguards are in place in deportation and expulsion procedures. Further
efforts are also needed to strengthen the asylum process, in particular ensuring
access to efficient and timely procedures and ensuring the fulfilment of basic needs
during the process, including through the right to work. There are also protection risks
related to the presence of non-state armed groups which need to be addressed –
including secondary displacements, forced recruitment, violence, human trafficking,
smuggling, labour exploitation, abuse, gender-based violence (GBV), and utilization
Cúcuta, border of Colombia with Venezuela. A mother with her two sons crosses on foot the Simon Bolivar
International Bridge into Colombia. ©UNHCR/Santiago Escobar-Jaramillo
42 Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela
in the drug production chain. In addition, further efforts will be needed to combat
discrimination and xenophobia. Lastly, the mass regularization of Venezuelans will
also require coordinated efforts to ensure effective access to rights and services, as
well as to employment, to promote Venezuelans’ self-sufficiency and capacity to
contribute to development in Colombia.
Joint Needs Analysis
The GIFMM has worked on an analysis of the population covered by this Plan:
refugees and migrants from Venezuela, Colombian returnees (including mixed
families), population in transit, with pendular movement, and host communities. This
analysis aimed to identify the different population profiles and different needs based
on information and data gathered through various assessments and from
consultations with local and national partners. The analysis was also focused on
determining projections of the population covered by this Plan for 2019 and the people
in need. It is estimated that by the end of 2019, over 2.2 million refugees and migrants
from Venezuela will be in Colombia, including some 1,755,000 with intention to stay
and 519,000 Colombian returnees. Over 1,114,000 refugees and migrants will be in
need of assistance. This is comprised of over 912,000 people with an intention to
remain in Colombia, some 108,000 people in pendular movement, and over 93,000
Colombian returnees. In addition, over 446,000 people in transit and some 310,000
people in host communities are also considered to be in need of assistance.
The GIFMM has also led the analysis which forms the basis of this Plan and, in
coordination with the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA),26 for the refugees and migrants chapter of the Colombia Humanitarian
Needs Overview and corresponding Humanitarian Response Plan.
• Refugees and migrants from Venezuela that have chosen Colombia as their
country of destination are in high need of the following, in order of priority:
 Access to livelihoods, essential for their integration and self-sufficiency.
Efforts are needed to ensure that the refugees and migrants from Venezuela
with regular status have effective access to labour markets, reducing
dependence on assistance and taking advantage of their economic potential.
Almost 55 per cent of Venezuelan adults who were of irregular status and were
registered during the RAMV were unemployed or work informally.
26 With support from iMMAP for the Humanitarian Needs Overview (HNO).
Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela 43
 Protection, particularly from violence, human trafficking, and gender and agerelated
risks, access to documentation and regularization for those without
regular status, as well as access to asylum procedures.
 Health, as the lack of access to adequate health services in Venezuela has
caused needs that require a response in Colombia, as well as their level of
access to healthcare being linked to their status. Out of some 396,000
Venezuelans who have expressed their intention to stay in Colombia during
the RAMV, 99 per cent were not affiliated to the social security system due to
their irregular status.
 Food security and nutrition, related to the lack of sufficient resources to
ensure a balanced diet in Venezuela, which has also negatively impacted their
health.
• Over 838,000 Venezuelans exited Colombia in 2018, more than 70 per cent of
whom crossed into Ecuador via the Rumichaca International Bridge travelling to
countries further south including Ecuador, Peru, and Chile. Those in transit, and
particularly those crossing the country on foot, face distinct risks and have critical
needs which include:
Cúcuta, border of Colombia with Venezuela. The Divine Providence community kitchen operates with the
support of local and other volunteers. The kitchen serves up to 5,000 meals every day to refugees and migrants
from Venezuela. ©WFP/ Darío Lopera
44 Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela
 Safe transport, identified as a top need identified by refugees and migrants.27
 Food, as 60 per cent were found to be at high risk of food insecurity.28
 Lodging, considering that more than 94 per cent reported to be sleeping
rough.
 Protection, in view of the fact that 79 per cent expressed having suffered
discrimination and about 40 per cent recognize armed actors as risk factors.29
 Access to water and sanitation during the journey.
• Those undertaking pendular movement are mostly looking to purchase basic
goods, access health care and other services, and/or seek temporary work to
support themselves and their families in Venezuela. The lack of formal and safe
income-generating opportunities for this group creates a risk of exploitation. In
addition, when Venezuelans cannot physically cross through formal border
crossing points, crossing through other areas creates risks derived from the
presence of non-state armed and criminal groups, including human trafficking and
smuggling, forced recruitment, and survival sex. In addition, Venezuelans who
enter Colombia temporarily are also in need of basic health care and food.
• Regarding Colombian returnees, one of their main needs is access to
information about the pathways already established by the government for
access to rights, nationality and documentation, as well as greater support
through the process to access these rights and reintegration in their home
country. Within this group, returning Colombian refugees and victims of the armed
conflict are of particular concern. While no figures are available, there are
Colombians in need of international protection among those returning. These
individuals will need support to prevent re-victimization and to access
institutional attention routes for victims of the armed conflict, with the aim of
ensuring, as appropriate, humanitarian assistance, compensation, and/or
reparation for victims of human rights violations.
• Host communities require support to cope with increased pressure from arrivals.
This includes particularly support in terms of livelihoods, access to basic
services, and housing due to increased demand; as well as support to
educational and health facilities, that now exceed their capacity. In this context,
there is also a need to ensure community engagement, social cohesion, and efforts
to combat discrimination and xenophobia. Effective integration will also require the
continuation and expansion of efforts to promote peaceful co-existence between
27 Santander North Local Coordination Team, “Report on the humanitarian situation of Venezuelan migrants transiting on foot”
(August 2018), with the participation of GIFMM, Norwegian Refugee Council (NRC), Servicio Jesuita de Refugiados (SJR) and
the UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA).
28 WFP, Needs Assessment persons traveling on foot, Ipiales (September 2018).
29 Santander North Local Coordination Team, “Report on the humanitarian situation of Venezuelan migrants transiting on foot”
(August 2018), with the participation of GIFMM, Norwegian Refugee Council (NRC), Servicio Jesuita de Refugiados (SJR) and
the UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA).
Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela 45
refugees and migrants from Venezuela and host communities, including areabased
projects that benefit all populations and strengthen community-level antidiscrimination
and anti-xenophobia campaigns.
• Cross-border indigenous communities, such as Wayuu and Yukpa groups,
who lack full recognition as nationals of both countries, are impacted by the
situation in Venezuela as well as conditions upon arrival and the impact of being
uprooted from traditional lands. Access to registration, documentation, rights
and services in this context is critical for these communities, in addition to an
approach that takes into account their specific needs and is culturally and ethnically
sensitive. In this context, assistance and mechanisms to ensure the recognition of
their Colombian nationality are critical to ensure access to basic services and
livelihoods, thus also protecting them from the effects of violence and armed
conflict.
Areas of Intervention,
Country Objectives and Priorities
The Plan recognizes the principle of government responsibility vis-à-vis the delivery of
humanitarian services, protection, and inclusion of refugees and migrants, with a
strong supportive and complementary role provided by RMRP partners. In all areas of
intervention, the coordinated response will seek to establish and reinforce links with
the Government of Colombia’s comprehensive response plan. Over 640,000 refugees
and migrants are expected to be reached through interventions under this Plan.
Additionally, a significant number of people in transit to other countries will be provided
with assistance. This Plan will also take into account the needs of host communities
and strives to ensure that social cohesion is maintained through delivery of improved
quality of services.
DIRECT EMERGENCY ASSISTANCE
• In response to the immediate and urgent needs of the large portion of the
population covered by this Plan, and based on the fact that almost all of those
arriving who leave Venezuela will either stay in Colombia or transit through
it on their way to other countries, one key area of the Plan in Colombia focuses
on emergency assistance.
• Partners’ main goals under this area of intervention are to respond effectively to
immediate basic needs, facilitate access to assistance through adequate
information, and actions to reduce risks that would create further
humanitarian needs.
46 Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela
The top three sectors for this area of intervention correspond to critical and lifesaving
assistance including (i) basic health assistance through emergency
health services, vaccinations, health assistance to people with specific needs; (ii)
food security and nutrition through provision of food, communal kitchens and
food vouchers; multi-sectoral interventions, such as (iii) shelter and (iv) Water,
Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH) in areas where the number of arrivals has
overwhelmed local absorption capacity, such as border and reception areas.
Assistance through cash-based interventions for immediate needs, including multipurpose
cash transfers, will be prioritized. Activities under this area of intervention
also include humanitarian transportation, communication and connectivity
mechanism, provision of Non-Food Items (NFIs), provision of information to assist
those needing to access response services, and preventive health and nutritional
efforts. Humanitarian assistance will target key reception and transit areas, which
covers both borders, urban centres and key transit points, including highways from
Venezuela to Ecuador. The provision of humanitarian assistance will be closely
coordinated by the national and local-level GIFMMs through participation in the
government’s local Unified Command Posts and Migratory Management
Roundtables to ensure a complementary and efficient response.
Cúcuta, border of Colombia with Venezuela. A woman from the Yukpa indigenous group takes part in the
mass registration exercise conducted by the Colombian authorities. ©UNHCR /Johanna Reina
Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela 47
PROTECTION
• Under this area of intervention, the response will focus on ensuring access to
documentation, regularization, territory and international protection
mechanisms.
• The identification, referral and response to cases with specific needs will be
strengthened, such as for children and survivors of GBV through
appropriate community-based or partner response mechanisms; and strengthening
community networks.
• Activities will also include legal assistance, provision of information and
orientation on rights and procedures, support on access to
documentation, regularization and asylum procedures, protection
monitoring, psychosocial support for people with specific needs, prevention
and identification and response to cases of human trafficking, GBV, and
exploitation.
• Partners will also look to support community-based organizations and
networks, supporting activities to strengthen their capacity to advocate and
organize for the promotion of their rights, as well as facilitating communication
between partners and communities and between communities themselves.
SOCIO-ECONOMIC AND CULTURAL INTEGRATION
• Partners’ main goals under this area of intervention will be to strengthen longterm,
equal and consistent access to basic services, such as education and
healthcare, generating livelihood opportunities, and promoting peaceful
coexistence with host communities.
• The objective of the planned activities is to enhance provision of services while
at the same time promoting integration of the arrivals and supporting Colombian
host communities. This will focus on activities to support access to livelihoods,
including access to the job market, facilitating access to documentation needed for
employment, such as the validation of academic titles and work experience, and
the promotion of productive initiatives.
• The Plan will also promote long-term access to services such as healthcare,
education and clean water, through interventions in host communities that expand
the availability and capacity of clinics, schools and water systems, among others.
This will be prioritized through an area-based approach to the response, with the
aim of creating or improving access to services in those areas where arrivals from
Venezuela are concentrated and providing them to host communities as well, thus
promoting peaceful coexistence.
48 Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela
• In addition, the Plan includes activities to promote social cohesion and efforts
against discrimination and xenophobia, including anti-discrimination/antixenophobia
campaigns and community-based projects to promote peaceful
coexistence and dialogue between arrivals and host communities.
CAPACITY STRENGTHENING
• The main goal of the Plan is to strengthen the overall capacity of the Colombian
State, both national and local institutions, to provide a comprehensive
management of the arrival of refugees, migrants and Colombian returnees.
This will be achieved through two key actions:
• The first line of activities seeks to provide technical support and increase the
capacity of different state institutions at the national and local levels that have
responsibilities related to refugees and migrants or protection-related areas, such
as child protection, as well as ensure interoperability of information systems from
different state institutions, with the support of the GIFMM Information Management
sub-group. This will be achieved through advocacy, technical assistance, and the
dissemination of best practices at all levels of government, as well as financing
personnel and equipment in key institutions.
• The second line aims to create structural and long-term State capacity by
providing technical assistance and conducting advocacy that will be reflected and
adopted into concrete norms, such as laws, decrees, and other regulations, as well
as strategic and far-reaching public policies.
Summary of
Objectives for 2019
DIRECT EMERGENCY ASSISTANCE
OBJECTIVE 1
Provide an effective response to immediate humanitarian basic needs of target
population, complementing and coordinated with the Government of Colombia’s
response.
OBJECTIVE 2
Provide target population with timely access to reliable, up-to-date, socially, and
culturally adequate information on access to mechanism to attend basic
humanitarian needs.
OBJECTIVE 3
Prevent and reduce humanitarian needs and risks of target population.
Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela 49
Partnership and Coordination
In light of the increase in arrivals from Venezuela, in 2016 UNHCR and IOM
established the Inter-Agency Border Group (GIF, by its Spanish acronym). The
group’s goal was to coordinate the response to the situation along the border area with
Venezuela and Colombia. In 2018, the GIF expanded its work and became the
GIFMM, led by UNHCR and IOM, covering the issue at a national level and providing
operational, strategic and political leadership.
PROTECTION
OBJECTIVE 1
Ensure effective access of target population to documentation, registration
processes, regularization, and to the asylum system, including the provision of
information and guidance, and promotion of access to territory for people in need
of international protection.
OBJECTIVE 2
Prevent, identify, refer, or provide a protection response for persons with specific
needs, among target population.
OBJECTIVE 3
Strengthen organizational community processes, including community networks
and protection mechanisms, for the target population, and promote participation to
guarantee two-way communication.
SOCIO-ECONOMIC AND CULTURAL INTEGRATION
OBJECTIVE 1
Strengthen access to basic services and basic goods and national and local
capacity, including on health care and education.
OBJECTIVE 2
Generate opportunities for dignified work, productive resources, and livelihoods for
the target population.
OBJECTIVE 3
Promote social cohesion, peaceful coexistence, and non-discrimination within host
communities.
CAPACITY STRENGTHENING
OBJECTIVE 1
Strengthen capacities and response mechanisms of government institutions for
the management and care of refugees and migrants.
OBJECTIVE 2
Strengthen the legal framework and public policy of the Government of Colombia
for the protection of refugees and migrants and management of the influx.
50 Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela
As of the end October 2018, the GIFMM has 38 members and local branches in six
departments. More branches are expected to be set up by the end of 2018 and in
2019, mirroring the Government of Colombia’s local coordination mechanism, the
Migration Management Roundtables (Mesas de Gestión Migratoria, in Spanish), to
ensure complementarity and coherence between the Government’s response and
GIFMM operations on the ground in key reception and transit areas.
In parallel to this situation and due to the ongoing armed conflict, Colombia is the only
country in the region with an existing humanitarian architecture, including a cluster
system. GIFMM works at the national and local level in a back-to-back system with
the humanitarian architecture to ensure maximum efficiency for all partners and
coherence between both coordination mechanisms.
ECUADOR
REFUGEE
AND MIGRANT
RESPONSE PLAN
Ecuador
413,658
Refugees and
Migrants in Need
350,849
Refugees and
Migrants Targeted
109,396
Target Host
Community
USD 117M
Financial
Requirements
D
D
D
D
Rumichaca
Tumbes
San Miguel
Macará
ECUADOR
PERU
COLOMBIA
Quito
Cuenca
Guayaquil
Santo Domingo de
Los Colorados
±
Tulcán
Guaranda
Ibarra
Regional Population Movements
24
RMRP Partners
in Working Group on
Refugees and Migrants
(GTRM)
Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela 53
Introduction -
Background and Achievements
The steady increase in the number of arrivals of refugees and migrants from
Venezuela in Ecuador posed a major challenge for governmental, humanitarian and
development actors responding to the unfolding situation. There were some
806,000 arrivals of refugees and migrants from Venezuela from January to October
2018, compared to 288,000 in 2017.30 Against this backdrop of increasing population
movements and humanitarian needs, resources became significantly overstretched.
Ecuador is a country of transit and destination for refugees and migrants
from Venezuela and is second largest after Colombia in terms of the number of
arrivals. Among those who entered the country regularly in 2018, an estimated 83
per cent (671,000) were in transit to Peru and other destinations, while 17 per cent
(135,000) remained in Ecuador. This brings the total number of refugees and
migrants from Venezuela to approximately 221,000 inside the country as of
September 2018.31
One of the major challenges faced by many Venezuelans choosing to stay in
Ecuador is access to regular status. Although those entering the country through
regular means obtain a temporary (tourist) visa for up to 180 days, this does not give
them the right to work. Once in the country, they can access temporary – and
later permanent – residence. However, the documents required to apply for a
residence permit are often difficult to obtain for Venezuelans, and the cost is high.
Those who cannot produce these documents or cover the cost will find themselves
in an irregular situation when their visas expire. As such, they face particular
challenges, including limited access to basic services and lack of incomegenerating
opportunities as well as greater exposure to protection risks, such
as human trafficking, exploitation and abuse. Access to asylum was another
challenge faced initially, although this improved progressively towards the end of
2018. However, asylum systems, initially intended to cope with about 5,000 to 6,000
claims a year, remain insufficient to cope with large numbers of arrivals.
30 According to data from the Government of Ecuador, available at http://servicios.turismo.gob.ec/index.php/turismocifras/
2018-09-19-17-01-51/movimientos-internacionales).
31 Ibid.
Over the course of 2018, the Government of Ecuador progressively adapted its
response to the growing number of arrivals. A state of emergency was declared in the
provinces of Carchi, El Oro and Pichincha in August 2018, enabling institutions to
take extraordinary measures to address needs as well as public health and security
risks.
54 Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela
Despite these efforts, mitigating the impact of the increased number of arrivals remains
challenging. When arrivals peaked in May, August and October 2018 at over 5,000
per day,32 it became increasingly difficult to address the heightened vulnerability of
new arrivals, many of whom spent days in the open at two northern border crossings
– Rumichaca and San Miguel – in Colombia before entering Ecuador. Approximately
36 per cent of refugees and migrants from Venezuela are reportedly travelling on foot
for part or all of their journey, often continuing onwards in very difficult conditions.33
32 Ibid.
33 UNHCR Protection Monitoring Report (October 2018).
Rumichaca, border of Ecuador with Colombia. Hundreds of refugees and migrants from Venezuela queue at the
border crossing. ©UNICEF/ Santiago Arcos
For instance, migration authorities increased the number of staff to process arrivals,
while mobile units from the Ministry of Public Health and social workers from the
Ministry of Social and Economic Inclusion were deployed. Local emergency
committees also took measures to identify and assist extremely vulnerable individuals,
including unaccompanied and separated children (UASC).
Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela 55
In 2019, a forward-looking and protection-oriented response will be adopted to meet
the needs of refugees and migrants from Venezuela in transit, while also assisting
those who stay in Ecuador. With respect to the humanitarian and emergency
response, partners plan to scale up life-saving assistance while reinforcing
coordination efforts. With protection as a core component of the response, particular
emphasis will be given to the provision of tailored assistance to vulnerable groups
such as children, women at risk, including pregnant and lactating women, elderly,
gender-based violence (GBV) survivors, and others with specific needs.
Beyond emergency interventions, the response strategy contains a significant medium
to long-term component, geared towards promoting the socio-economic and cultural
integration of refugees and migrants from Venezuela remaining in-country, with
specific attention also paid to host communities and governmental institutions. A
certain degree of flexibility will be maintained to enable partners to adapt to sudden
developments. As such, a specific inter-agency contingency plan aiming to respond to
unforeseen eventualities is underway.
Joint Needs Analysis
It is estimated that by the end of 2019, around 506,000 refugees and migrants from
Venezuela will be in Ecuador. Over 413,000 refugees and migrants will be in need of
assistance. In addition, over 209,000 people in host communities are also considered
to be in need of assistance.
• Virtually all refugees and migrants from Venezuela arrive at Ecuador’s northern
border, where a significant number are in critical need of humanitarian and
emergency assistance. Many do not have the resources to continue their onward
journey in a safe way. A needs assessment conducted in September and October
2018 found that more than 55 per cent of those surveyed were unable to meet their
basic needs, resulting in high levels of food insecurity.34 Challenges highlighted
also included limited access to safe water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH), as
well as shelter, with many forced to sleep in public spaces.35 Access to health
care, including psychosocial support services, immunization and anti-retroviral
human immunodeficiency virus / acquired immune deficiency syndrome
(HIV/AIDS) treatment, was also described as insufficient. Besides existing needs
in key entry points at border areas, needs for assistance have also been identified
for populations in transit. Return dynamics will have to be closely monitored, with
34 Ecuador CFF Multi-Sectorial Needs Assessment (October 2018), available at
https://app.powerbi.com/view?r=eyJrIjoiZmFlZDBjOGQtMjU2My00YWFhLTlhOTMtOTNiMGJhY2Y1NDIwIiwidCI6IjgwNWRiZT
RkLWFiZDMtNDdlNS1hNDQ2LWQ0NzQ5N2FlMTE4YSIsImMiOjF9.
35 IOM Ecuador Displacement Tracking Matrix (DTM) Report Round 1 (August 2018).
56 Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela
increasing numbers of Venezuelans entries being recorded at the border with Peru
(Huaquillas).
• Information needs on available life-saving services and rights have been
identified among refugees and migrants from Venezuela.
• Major challenges in the protection environment of refugees and migrants from
Venezuela relate to their documentation, regularization, access to asylum, and
access to residency status. By early November 2018, some 97,000 had obtained
a residence permit, while some 9,200 had requested asylum in 2018.36 Although
this is considerable, the pending visa requests are still high. In recent months, the
number of refugees and migrants from Venezuela travelling with their identity card
as their only form of documentation has grown, which increased challenges on visa
processing.37 Many reported experiencing difficulties in obtaining a passport in
Venezuela, and faced a number of barriers when accessing a residence permit or
requesting asylum. In view of these challenges, refugees and migrants from
Venezuela are increasingly exposed to protection risks. In this context, access to
asylum and regular status is an important component in discussions with the
government, to ensure that refugees and migrants from Venezuela are able to
access services, enjoy rights and benefits and are less exposed to various
protection risks.
• The number of arriving refugees and migrants from Venezuela indicating to have
various vulnerabilities has grown over the course of 2018. Some 27 per cent of the
people surveyed presented specific needs in the month of October, such as
serious and critical medical conditions or disabilities.38 Seventeen per cent of those
surveyed in Quito also reported witnessing some form of human trafficking and
smuggling,39 and approximately 30 per cent reported having been robbed,
intimidated, scammed, or assaulted during the journey, mainly in Colombia.40
Available information indicates that women are exposed to sexual exploitation and
abuse and forced to resort to survival sex.41 Children also face serious protection
risks such as exploitation and abuse and separation from caregivers, especially
when undocumented. Only about one-third of those estimated to be in the country
are registered to attend school. There is also a particular need to facilitate family
tracing and reunification, especially in the case of UASC. Lesbian, gay, bisexual,
transgender and intersex (LGBTI) persons are also especially vulnerable.
36 UNHCR Protection Monitoring Report (October 2018).
37 Ibid.
38 Ibid.
39 IOM Ecuador DTM Report Round 1 (August 2018).
40 UNHCR Protection Monitoring Report (October 2018).
41 Ecuador CFF Multi-Sectorial Needs Assessment (October 2018).
Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela 57
• Access to income-generating opportunities is crucial to the socio-economic
inclusion of refugees and migrants. However, most reported needing an income
not only to meet their basic needs, but also to support their families who are still in
Venezuela. Lack of income-generating activities exacerbates risks for women, girls
and young people in particular, exposing them to different forms of exploitation and
abuse. Mobility monitoring activities show that those arriving in Ecuador have
different educational backgrounds.42 In this regard, the recognition of skills and
education, particularly among refugees and migrants with higher qualifications, will
be critical. In addition, xenophobia and discrimination will need to be addressed
with a view to fostering social cohesion and facilitating access to adequate housing,
health care and social protection programmes.
• Support to ensure access to asylum and regular status, including through
registration processes led by strengthened government institutions is required.
In light of the increasing scale and complexity of the emergency, there is a critical
need to coordinate with and strengthen the primary role of the government to
support a medium to long-term response, including through the national social
security system. Active engagement with national authorities will be crucial to
ensure the response is complementary to the government’s comprehensive
response plan and related strategies. Regarding reception conditions,
strengthening border management capacities and enhancing social services and
monitoring systems are two key areas of focus.
Areas of Intervention,
Country Objectives and Priorities
The Plan recognizes the principle of government responsibility vis-à-vis the delivery of
humanitarian services, protection, and inclusion of refugees and migrants, with a
strong supportive and complementary role provided by RMRP partners. In all areas of
intervention, the coordinated response will seek to establish and reinforce links with
the government’s comprehensive response plan. Over 350,000 refugees and migrants
from Venezuela, as well as over 109,000 host community members, are expected to
be reached through interventions under this Plan.
DIRECT EMERGENCY ASSISTANCE
• Data collection and analysis on human mobility as well as the design of specific
monitoring mechanisms, needs and vulnerability assessments tools for
humanitarian and development partners will continue to be a major priority in order
42 IOM Ecuador DTM Report Round 1 (August 2018).
58 Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela
to inform decision-making and coordination. Data on the enjoyment of rights,
needs, goods and services, with a particular focus on age and gender, will be
collected and analysed. Changes in the context will also be closely monitored,
especially if a greater number of refugees and migrants remain in or move to
Ecuador due to developments in neighbouring countries. Close monitoring of the
movements of refugees and migrants will be crucial to meet needs.
• The provision of basic assistance such as food, shelter, non-food items (NFIs),
as well WASH and health interventions will be coordinated at border points and in
areas where refugees and migrants from Venezuela transit through or have settled.
Food security and food assistance will also form an integral part of the coordinated
response, including for those in transit. Regarding health, a number of
interventions will be prioritized, such as the provision of health supplies and
nutritional supplements, medical referrals, and strengthening of capacities to
identify, prevent, and respond to communicable and non-communicable diseases.
The provision of temporary shelter will also offer essential protection and
assistance to those who need it most. WASH activities will be carried out to ensure
access to clean water and sanitary services. Humanitarian transportation will
facilitate the safe movement of vulnerable individuals and families, while other
vulnerable individuals without resources will be identified and assisted through
cash-based interventions (CBI).
Rumichaca, border of Ecuador with Colombia. Ana Victoria Vivaz, five years old, receives a vaccine against
measles, rubella, and mumps by a doctor of the Ministry of Health of Ecuador, whilst in transit to travel to Peru
with his parents. ©UNICEF/ Santiago Arcos
Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela 59
• Partners will also focus on better communication with refugees and migrants,
including through social media, in order to provide more information on which
services are available and how to access them. Innovation will be a key component
in this regard.
PROTECTION
• Partners will focus their interventions on ensuring access to the asylum system
and regular status. Particular attention will be paid to barriers to processes
surrounding documentation and access to regular stay. In these different areas,
partners will intervene by providing legal assistance to refugees and migrants on
access to asylum and mechanisms for regularization.
• Partners will continue the identification and referral of persons with specific
needs to specialized services. Partners will place greater emphasis on the
provision of protection services for children, women at risk, GBV survivors,
vulnerable LGBTI persons, and others.
• Partners will apply a new protocol on children on the move that was agreed in
November 2018 by the Ministry for Foreign Affairs and Human Mobility, the Ministry
of Economic and Social Inclusion and the Ministry of Interior, to ensure that children
and adolescents can access the territory, are registered, and provided with
protective measures, in accordance with their best interests. In line with the
protocol, mechanisms will be developed to ensure family reunification for UASC.
SOCIO-ECONOMIC AND CULTURAL INTEGRATION
• With respect to socio-economic and cultural inclusion, partners will seek to
enhance self-reliance opportunities and ensure access to health care, education,
and adequate housing, all with an age, gender and diversity perspective. To this
end, partners will support the provision of services in existing – and where needed,
strengthen – structures, including though investments benefitting Venezuelan
refugees and migrants and host communities.
• Access to formal employment and enhanced livelihoods, also for host
communities, will be key areas of focus. Income-generating opportunities will be
prioritized in 2019 for those choosing to remain in Ecuador, with partners
examining the employability of refugees and migrants from Venezuela, supporting
processes for the recognition of skills and education, conducting job-market
studies, and offering tailored livelihood trainings. Partners also plan to collaborate
with employee associations, business associations and chambers of commerce.
Active outreach and dialogue will be sought with the private sector and international
financial institutions as well. Self-reliance programmes will also be strengthened to
60 Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela
ensure basic needs are met and that public services are not further congested or
overcrowded.
• Cross-cutting among these themes are fostering social cohesion, peaceful
coexistence and non-discrimination. Particular attention will be paid to
monitoring and mitigating social tensions and xenophobia inside Ecuador, which
may arise as the number of arrivals of refugees and migrants from Venezuela
continues to increase. Partners are committed to carrying out an anti-xenophobia
campaign and monitoring the increasing emergence of a polarized discourse,
including through the establishment of an observatory. In the context of the
campaign, age, gender and diversity will be highlighted with inclusive initiatives,
including to the benefit of host communities, which will also be important to prevent
and/or respond to tensions.
CAPACITY STRENGTHENING
• Activities will focus on strengthening government institutions, including their
information management and coordination mechanisms to facilitate decisionmaking
at the local and national levels and reinforce institutional capacities.
• At border points, technical assistance will target border management, protection
and health. For example, material support and training will be provided to
government officials working on asylum, regularization and documentation.
• Visa processing, migration registry, refugee status determination and
regularization efforts by the Government of Ecuador will receive support to
facilitate access to regular status to Venezuelan refugees and migrants.
• Government institutions will also be strengthened to be able to prevent, identify,
and respond to cases of GBV, exploitation and abuse, as well as human
trafficking and people smuggling.
• Mapping of existing services will be carried out to help build capacity and
strengthen a range of services, including access to information, asylum,
regularisation, legal assistance, health and education.
• Regarding information management and coordination, emphasis will be placed
on establishing and formalizing local coordination mechanisms, including
opportunities for cross-cutting collaboration. In general, partners plan to create
more opportunities for government officials to participate in technical trainings, and
enhance knowledge and coordination of the response.
Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela 61
Summary of
Objectives for 2019
DIRECT EMERGENCY ASSISTANCE
OBJECTIVE 1
Identify and respond to the immediate priority needs of the target population in an
efficient and timely way.
OBJECTIVE 2
Generate and facilitate access to information on rights, goods and services that
save lives, using a gender, age and diversity approach, and that guides the
humanitarian response.
PROTECTION
OBJECTIVE 1
Increase access to asylum, regular status and documentation.
OBJECTIVE 2
Support the identification and referral of cases with specific protection needs and
access to services.
SOCIO-ECONOMIC AND CULTURAL INTEGRATION
OBJECTIVE 1
Increase the access of the refugee and migrant population to health, and
education services, and adequate housing, on an equal footing with the host
community, taking into consideration specific age, gender and diversity
characteristics.
OBJECTIVE 2
Generate opportunities to access formal employment, productive resources, and
livelihoods for the refugee and migrant population, on an equal footing with the
host community.
OBJECTIVE 3
Foster social cohesion, peaceful coexistence, and non-discrimination in host
communities.
CAPACITY STRENGTHENING
OBJECTIVE 1
Enhance the capacities of the Government in border management, placing a
particular emphasis on access to social services, as well as to asylum and regular
status.
OBJECTIVE 2
Strengthen the management of information and coordination for decision-making
at the local and national level.
OBJECTIVE 3
Reinforce the capacities of local and national institutions in the area of
comprehensive protection and integration of the refugee and migrant population.
62 Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela
Partnership and Coordination
Many partners in the country participate in the National Human Mobility Board
meetings convened by the Ministry for Foreign Affairs and Human Mobility. The Board
aims to supervise, coordinate and monitor the implementation of public policies at an
inter-institutional, inter-sectoral, and thematic level for people on the move. Such
forums open up opportunities to collaborate with a wider range of actors in the
response. In this regard, the contribution of civil society groups has been crucial and
will continue to be a key area of cooperation, while new partnerships are fostered in a
spirit of complementarity and sustainability.
The increasing scale of arrivals of refugees and migrants from Venezuela in 2018 and
the anticipated flows in 2019 have demonstrated the need to scale up inter-agency
coordination mechanisms within the humanitarian community as well as with
government counterparts. To ensure effective monitoring, efficiency of the overall
response, and integration of a longer-term perspective, dedicated coordination
mechanisms at the local and national level are being established and/or formalized.
At national level, the Working Group on Refugees and Migrants (GTRM by its Spanish
acronym), led by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and
the International Organization for Migration (IOM), was established. In order to
complement the ongoing response led by the Government of Ecuador and within the
framework of the regional response planning, GTRM partners developed this Plan
during the latter half of 2018. Eleven United Nations (UN) agencies and 13 Non-
Governmental Organizations (NGOs) were involved in defining the national objectives
and activities within the four areas of intervention.
Under the overall framework of the GTRM, partners aim to establish sub-working
groups, which will ensure that they can discuss thematic priorities and cross-cutting
issues within a formal structure. Channels with government counterparts will be
strengthened to promote active dialogue and ensure the technical alignment of the
response provided by humanitarian partners and (local) authorities. Other existing
formal and de facto coordination mechanisms will be broadened, and where needed,
formalized to avoid duplication of activities and foster strong inter-agency leadership
at the field level.
Inter-agency information management will be a key pillar of the Plan and of related
coordination mechanisms. Dedicated resources will be made available in this regard.
At national level, an information management sub-working group will be the platform
for key interventions such as the tracking of implementation of activities and the
systematic dissemination of coordination products. These products will include maps
and population movement trends, the mapping of the presence of partners, and
reporting tools against objectives and targets identified. Existing sources of
Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela 63
information will be examined and will feed into such products. This will help address
current gaps in information and be undertaken to ensure the comparability of results.
Rumichaca, border of Ecuador with Colombia. Reynaldo Leon, 38 years old, shaves his beard while waiting
his turn at the border of Ecuador before continuing his travel to Peru. ©UNICEF/ Santiago Arcos
64 Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela
PERU REFUGEE
AND MIGRANT
RESPONSE PLAN
Peru
1,163,398
Refugees and
Migrants in Need
394,305
Refugees and
Migrants Targeted
89,460
Target Host
Community
USD 106M
Financial
Requirements
D
D
D
Tumbes
Arica
Macará
BOLIVIA
PERU
BRAZIL
CHILE
COLOMBIA
ECUADOR
Piura
Arequipa
Chiclayo
Trujillo
Iquitos
Tacna
±
Callao
Lima
Regional Population Movements
32
RMRP Partners
in Working Group on
Refugees and Migrants
(GTRM)
Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela 67
Introduction -
Background and Achievements
Since early 2017, 600,000 refugees and migrants from Venezuela arrived and are
living in Peru, the second largest destination country in the region.43 As of September
2018, Peru has received over 150,000 asylum-seekers from Venezuela. Over the past
year, according to the national Migration Authority, more than 220,000 refugees and
migrants from Venezuela settled in the metropolitan areas of Lima and Callao,44 with
a significant number moving to other regions in the country, as livelihood opportunities
in Lima are becoming scarce.
Throughout 2018, a monthly average of 60,000 refugees and migrants from
Venezuela entered Peru through official entry points. Almost 90 per cent arrived
43 “Superintendencia Nacional de Migraciones” (National Migrations Authority).
44 According to data from Migration authorities and the Special Commission for Refugees of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, some
refugees and migrants from Venezuela are moving to Cusco, Piura, Arequipa, Ica and the regions of Ancash, Lambayeque, La
Libertad, and Junin.
Tumbes, border of Ecuador with Peru. Arrival of refugees and migrants from Venezuela. ©IOM/ Juliana Quintero
68 Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela
through the northern border entry point of Tumbes. Further, in 2018, some 151,000
people have left Peru through official border points, including Tacna, which is the main
exit point for Venezuelans who travel southwards on to other countries.
Refugees and migrants from Venezuela face various protection risks throughout their
journey and arrive in dire need of assistance. Access to food, water, medical services,
safe shelter, and documentation is an immediate need after traveling for days through
dangerous routes and being exposed to risks including extortion, threats,
discrimination, gender-based violence (GBV), abuse, exploitation, human trafficking,
and smuggling. Once in the country, access to health and other social services,
livelihoods, and the rise in xenophobia are among the main concerns.
Peru continues to provide access to asylum procedures and regular status for
refugees and migrants from Venezuela. Since 2015, over 150,000 persons have
requested asylum, and over 113,000 have done so since January 2018. Since 2017,
Venezuelans can access the Temporary Stay Permit (PTP, by its acronym in Spanish),
which provides access to the right to work. The programme has been praised by the
international community as an example of how states can protect refugees and
migrants by offering regular status. As of November 2018, more than 350,000 people
had obtained, or were in the process of obtaining, the PTP. However, as of 31
December 2018, the opportunity for those who arrived before 31 October to obtain the
PTP will end, and those who arrived after 31 October cannot apply for the PTP, leaving
refugees and migrants from Venezuela with fewer options to regularize their stay.
Since 25 August 2018, it is also a requirement for Venezuelans to have a valid
passport to enter the country, with a few exceptions for vulnerable cases, who can
access. As an effort to ensure access to the territory for those who do not hold
passports, the Special Commission for Refugees is now present at the Binational
Border Centre in Tumbes, bordering Ecuador. This measure allows people in need of
international protection to access the asylum system from the moment they enter the
territory. Early observations in November 2018 illustrate that an increased number of
Venezuelans are seeking asylum in the absence of the possibility of applying for PTP.
It is estimated that 630,000 persons from host communities will be in need of some
form of assistance. The Plan will ensure support to over 89,000 persons in host
communities in addition to support to governmental institutions.
Following the request by the United Nations (UN) Secretary General to the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and the International
Organization for Migration (IOM) in April 2018, to lead and coordinate the response to
refugees and migrants, humanitarian partners established a working group to respond
to the needs of Venezuelan refugees and migrants (GTRM, by its Spanish acronym).
The GTRM provides a coordination platform for humanitarian and development actors
to ensure a comprehensive response.
Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela 69
The response for refugees and migrants from Venezuela in the country spans a vast
geographical area, from the northern border with Ecuador to the southern border with
Chile. The main locations of interventions are the capital Lima, Tumbes, and Tacna.
Efforts in 2018 focused on the provision of immediate relief to refugees and migrants
from Venezuelan entering Peru, including water, food, shelter, medical support,
identification and assistance for the most vulnerable, including internal travel
arrangements, as well as legal orientation and support for the regularization of legal
stay.
Joint Needs Analysis
Refugees and migrants from Venezuela living in Peru face protection risks and have
limited access to resources to meet their basic needs. The response planned in this
chapter is based on the projection that over 1.3 million Venezuelans will be living in
Peru by December 2019. Of these, 85 per cent will be in need of humanitarian
assistance. Additionally, 630,000 persons from host communities are also considered
to be in need of assistance.
• Access to asylum and regular status for refugees and migrants from Venezuela
continues to be one of the main challenges in Peru. While access to asylum
procedures is guaranteed, the increasing number of asylum applications places a
toll on personnel, registration systems, and decision procedures. This results in
delays to decisions on asylum requests and limits asylum-seekers’ opportunities
for local integration, with administrative barriers when accessing many public
services and with no access to social programmes. Peru continues to grant access
to territory to Venezuelans who use regular pathways such as the work visa.
Nevertheless, this mechanism does not substitute the need for a specific pathway
for Venezuelans that tackles the restrictions in accessing public services and
minimizes the protection risks that exacerbate the difficulties faced by refugees
and migrants from Venezuela in Peru.
• Most refugees and migrants from Venezuela entering Peru have endured long
journeys and require access to health as well as urgent assistance upon arrival.
Once settled in the country, medical treatment continues to be a pressing need.
Around five per cent of Venezuelans entering Peru have an urgent health problem
and of those, 76 per cent will require life-long treatment or daily medication.45 The
majority have no access to the public health system in Peru. The asylum-seeker
certificate and the PTP document are not recognized as valid documents to access
45 IOM Peru Displacement Tracking Matrix (DTM) Report Round 3 (July 2018).
70 Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela
the Peruvian social service system. Pregnant women and children under five years
of age, however, have access to medical assistance, regardless of their legal
status in the country.
• During the 2018 school year, approximately 23,000 Venezuelan children were able
to enrol in the Peruvian education system. An additional number of children
attended school despite not being formally enrolled. Therefore, many children face
problems with the validation of their certificates due to lack of proper
documentation. Other children are out of school due to lack of financial resources
or lack of placements for their age group, amongst others. The capacity of the
education system is under pressure and cannot ensure access to quality education
for all Venezuelan children.
• Access to employment also remains a challenge. Many Venezuelan
professionals face difficulties in accessing the formal labour market and validating
their professional and academic titles in a country with predominantly informal
sector employment. In this context, many refugees and migrants from Venezuela
resort to non-formal jobs, where they are exposed to labour exploitation and abuse.
• Women and children are found to be particularly vulnerable. Over recent months,
humanitarian partners have observed an increase in the number of female-headed
households entering Peru. They may have been exposed to significant protection
risks during their journey, including human trafficking, abuse, and GBV, resulting
in needs for specialized services. There are strong indications that a significant
number of women engage in survival sex as a negative coping mechanism to
provide for themselves and their children. The number of victims of human
trafficking and/or sexual exploitation is also increasing. In addition, increasing
numbers of unaccompanied and separated children (UASC) traveling to Peru have
been observed, as well as elderly and people with disabilities.
• Host communities have demonstrated enormous solidarity with refugees and
migrants from Venezuela in Peru. However, the current reception capacity is
overstretched, as infrastructure and services are becoming strained. In this
context, the most pressing needs of the host communities need to be addressed.
• With stretched resources and increasing number of arrivals, the risks of mounting
discrimination and xenophobia is increasing. Over 35 per cent of Venezuelan
refugees and migrants interviewed in Lima reported being subjected to
discrimination based on their nationality.46 It is also noted that 20 per cent of the
46 IOM Peru DTM Report Round 3 (July 2018).
Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela 71
people interviewed in Tumbes had experienced risks during their travel, including
discrimination.47
Areas of Intervention,
Country Objectives and Priorities
Under the coordination platform, humanitarian partners aim to provide a
comprehensive response for refugees and migrants from Venezuela, in close
cooperation with the government and host communities. Over 394,000 refugees and
migrants from Venezuela, as well as over 89,000 host community members, are
expected to be reached through interventions under this Plan. Interventions will focus
on the following:
DIRECT EMERGENCY ASSISTANCE
• Given the increasing number of arrivals to Peru, humanitarian partners will focus
on providing direct emergency assistance at the main entry border points in
the form of water and food, core relief items, medical assistance, shelter, legal
orientation, counselling, and psychosocial support. Communicating with
communities (CwC) will be strengthened in order to ensure that refugees and
migrants are aware of how to access basic services and assistance.
• Access to shelter will be facilitated through a range of shelter options, where
water, food, and other essential services will be available. The distribution of
core relief items will also be prioritized, as many Venezuelans enter the country
with limited or no belongings.
• Access to counselling, including legal assistance, will also be strengthened to
ensure that refugees and migrants from Venezuela are aware of their rights and
responsibilities, and the options available to regularize their status in Peru,
including access to asylum procedures, when appropriate.
• In 2019, humanitarian interventions will furthermore aim at ensuring a strong data
collection to better understand the specific needs of refugees and migrants from
Venezuela and tailor the response accordingly.
47 UNHCR Protection Monitoring Report (April-May 2018).
72 Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela
PROTECTION
• Improving access to identification, documentation, and regular status will be
a priority to ensure that refugees and migrants from Venezuela can remain
regularly in Peru. These efforts will be coupled with further reinforcing asylum
procedures through strengthened and decentralized registration and decision
procedures as well as additional personnel, while also working to identify and
support access to regular status that include protection safeguards.
• Humanitarian and development actors will prioritize the strengthening of
protection responses for UASC, elderly people, GBV survivors, lesbian, gay,
bisexual, transgender and intersex (LGBTI) persons, people with disabilities, and
others with specific needs. Efforts will also be strengthened to reinforce national
capacities to prevent and assist survivors of human trafficking or smuggling.
Lima, Peru. Kelvis Briceño (right), 27 years old, lives with his wife and daughter in Lima, Peru. He arrived from
Venezuela alone a year ago and his family joined him a few months later. To make a living, he bakes and sells
pastries in his neighbourhood with help from fellow Venezuelans, Richard Plaza (left), 39, and Greyma Badillo
(centre). ©UNHCR/ Santiago Escobar-Jaramillo
Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela 73
• Programming and advocacy for integration into existing national services, such
as primary healthcare, education, and financial inclusion will be pursued.
• Livelihood opportunities will be strengthened through advocacy efforts and
targeted interventions. Vocational training and capacity building will support the
economic integration of refugees and migrants from Venezuela into the Peruvian
market and will also target host communities. Entrepreneurship will be promoted
through small-scale projects and the provision of seed capital to start businesses
in the country.
• Partners will furthermore focus on the strengthening of awareness and solidarity
campaigns to combat discrimination and xenophobia towards Venezuelans and
promote their social inclusion in host communities.
• Working with national and local authorities on their preparedness measures and
protection-based response plans will be a priority in 2019. Efforts will focus on
supporting national systems to cope with the increasing number of arrivals in the
country and strengthening the public sector. Increased resilience of host
communities is key to promote social cohesion.
• Capacity strengthening opportunities will be provided to public officials focusing on
different topics, including human rights, international refugee law, and
migration management.
CAPACITY STRENGTHENING
SOCIO-ECONOMIC AND CULTURAL INTEGRATION
74 Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela
Summary of
Objectives for 2019
DIRECT EMERGENCY ASSISTANCE
OBJECTIVE 1
Provide target population with emergency assistance to cover their basic needs in
a timely and efficient manner.
OBJECTIVE 2
Provide target population with access to relevant, reliable and up-to-date information
and guidance for the exercise and knowledge of their rights.
OBJECTIVE 3
Generate and share reliable information to guide decision-making.
PROTECTION
OBJECTIVE 1
Ensure access of the target population to the national territory, documentation,
registration processes, asylum, and regular status
OBJECTIVE 2
Respond to the specific protection needs of target population.
OBJECTIVE 3
Prevent and reduce protection risks through the dissemination of information,
communication, and the strengthening of organizational processes, including
community protection networks.
SOCIO-ECONOMIC AND CULTURAL INTEGRATION
OBJECTIVE 1
Provide target population with access to public services, social programmes, and
housing in a dignified manner.
OBJECTIVE 2
Provide target population with access to formal employment and to financial
products and services in an effective manner.
OBJECTIVE 3
Promote a peaceful, inclusive, and respectful environment where refugees,
migrants, and host communities can coexist.
CAPACITY STRENGTHENING
OBJECTIVE 1
Strengthen the capacities and preparedness mechanisms of government institutions
to manage the population flows.
OBJECTIVE 2
Adapt and update the legal framework and public policy of the State for the
protection and management of the refugee and migrant population flows.
Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela 75
Partnership and Coordination
Since its establishment in May 2018, the GTRM has provided a coordination platform
for humanitarian and development actors to ensure a comprehensive and cohesive
response. The platform, led by UNHCR and IOM, has established and promoted a
coordinated approach, engaging more than 33 partners working across the country
to support refugees and migrants from Venezuela and their host communities. The
GTRM complements the efforts undertaken by the Government of Peru in responding
to the growing needs of refugees and migrants.
Under the GTRM, joint assessments and monitoring are being strengthened,
benefiting the larger humanitarian community and ensuring that interventions are
targeted and responsive to the most pressing needs. So far, four Sub-Working Groups
have been established in the areas of Information Management, Communications,
Protection and Cash Transfers. An example of the work of the Sub-Working Groups
is the ongoing coordination effort to carry out a national survey to understand the
socio-demographic characteristics, trends, and vulnerabilities of Venezuelan
populations settled throughout the country.
76 Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela
CARIBBEAN
SUB-REGIONAL
REFUGEE
AND MIGRANT
RESPONSE PLAN
Caribbean
177,486
Refugees and
Migrants in Need
141,174
Refugees and
Migrants Targeted
24,639
Target Host
Community
USD 35M
Financial
Requirements
ANTIGUA
& BARBUDA
ANGUILLA
CURACAO
ARUBA
BARBADOS
COLOMBIA
DOMINICA
DOMINICAN
REPUBLIC
GRENADA
GUYANA
HAITI
SAINT
LUCIA
PUERTO RICO
TRINIDAD
AND TOBAGO
VIRGIN
ISLANDS, U.S
Santo Domingo
Georgetown
Caracas Port of Spain
VENEZUELA,
BOLIVARIAN
REPUBLIC OF
Willemstad
Oranjestad
±
Regional Population Movements
14
RMRP
Partners
Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela 79
Introduction -
Background and Achievements
In recent years, five countries in the sub-region have been hosting growing numbers
of refugees and migrants from Venezuela: Aruba, Curaçao, the Dominican Republic,
Guyana, and Trinidad and Tobago. It is estimated that around 147,000 individuals will
have arrived by air, land, and sea by the end of 2018, including some returnees in
Guyana.
Caribbean countries vary in terms of their geography, linguistic, legal, and socioeconomic
backgrounds, which results in diverse local operational environments and
humanitarian responses. For instance, official languages in the Caribbean include
English, Dutch, and Spanish. Guyana and Trinidad and Tobago are members of the
Caribbean Community and Common Market (CARICOM) and Caribbean Single
Market and Economy (CSME), while Aruba, Curaçao, and the Dominican Republic are
not. All of the aforementioned countries have migration policy guidelines translated
into different national policies. The Dominican Republic, Guyana, and Trinidad and
Tobago have adopted policy and laws to counter human trafficking. In addition, Aruba
and Curaçao have dedicated counter-trafficking units in the government.
Considering the small size and limited absorption capacity of the concerned countries,
the increasing number of refugees and migrants from Venezuela has had an impact
on their host communities. Concerns about the growing numbers have led countries
in the Caribbean to introduce restrictions on regular migration such as reinstating visa
requirements for Venezuelans and issuing visas with more limited time periods.
Increasingly, non-entry practices are leading to instances of refoulement. Many people
who entered the countries regularly are now finding themselves in situations where
they are unable to extend their stay and are falling into irregular status. With reduced
options for regular stay in these host countries, coupled with increasing difficulties in
obtaining documentation and passports from their country, refugees and migrants
from Venezuela with irregular status are at high risk of being detained and deported.
Furthermore, given the absence of/or nascent asylum systems and lack of national
asylum legislation in many Caribbean countries, access to territory and asylum
procedures need to be enhanced for those in need of international protection.
Shrinking regular routes out of Venezuela to the Caribbean have made refugees and
migrants, especially women and children, particularly vulnerable to human trafficking
and smuggling, as well as to increasing risks of exploitation and abuse. Concerns
regarding protection at sea are also prevalent in the Caribbean, with refugees and
migrants from Venezuela arriving by boat, risking perilous journeys to reach safety.
80 Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela
Further, partners have identified shelter, access to food, adequate nutrition and health
care as well as the provision of livelihoods, and self-reliance opportunities, as the
priority needs that are to be addressed in a more efficient and timely manner. The
Caribbean chapter of the 2019 RMRP outlines the intended interventions and their
related financial requirements for the sub-region, in support to the response of national
governments. Through the coordination platforms that are being established at
national level, United Nations (UN) agencies, Non-Governmental Organizations
(NGOs), and civil society aim to meet the emergency assistance, protection, and
integration needs of refugees and migrants from Venezuela.
Joint Needs Analysis
The Caribbean response is based on the projection that the refugee and migrant
population from Venezuela will grow to around 222,000 by the end of 2019, with
irregular arrivals expected to continue. Among this population, around 177,500
refugees and migrants from Venezuela are estimated to require assistance throughout
the upcoming year. A scale-up of the direct emergency and protection response, as
well as increased support for socio-economic and cultural inclusion mechanisms, are
urgently required to complement governments’ efforts and to ensure communities
continue to receive refugees and migrants from Venezuela.
Port of Spain, Trinidad and Tobago. A group of refugee and migrant children from Venezuela attend a mathematics
class in an alternative learning space. ©UNHCR/ Santiago Escobar-Jaramillo
Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela 81
• A significant number of the refugees and migrants from Venezuela in the
Caribbean are estimated to be in an irregular situation, as of late 2018. With the
rising number of arrivals, growing needs are linked to access to territory, access
to asylum, and regular status including alternative legal pathways to stay.
National asylum legislations and systems need to be put in place or enhanced
across the sub-region for those in need of international protection. Without regular
status, refugees and migrants from Venezuela face greater protection threats and
risks and have limited access to public services.
• While information on the vulnerabilities of those leaving Venezuela is being
collected on a limited scale in some countries of the sub-region, there is a need for
further multi-sectoral data collection and analysis on human mobility, emerging
trends, and needs in order to better tailor the response.
Access to sufficient food and nutrition, safe drinking water and sanitation
facilities, and safe shelter are reported to be the most pressing needs by
refugees and migrants from Venezuela in the sub-region.
• Access to health care is also insufficient and is more acute in those countries
where Venezuelans and other third country nationals do not have access to public
health facilities, especially with regards to the treatment of communicable
diseases, sexual and reproductive health services, life-saving drugs, anti-retroviral
human immunodeficiency virus and acquired immune deficiency syndrome
(HIV/AIDS) treatment, psychosocial support, and vaccinations.
• Refugees and migrants from Venezuela are exposed to significant protection risks.
Growing entry restrictions across the sub-region increase the number of people
taking irregular routes being exposed to risks of human trafficking and/or
smuggling, with women and children especially vulnerable to exploitation and
abuse. Access to immigration detention facilities, to monitor the detention
conditions and the situation of migrants and refugees from Venezuela in such
centres remains limited in the region.
• Partners have noted growing vulnerabilities, with an increase in the number of
persons at risk or with acute needs. In this context, the risk of gender-based
violence (GBV) is aggravated. As their vulnerabilities grow, refugees and migrants
from Venezuela become more susceptible to resorting to negative coping
mechanisms, including survival sex for many women, and child labour as well
as other forms of exploitation.
• Several governments of Caribbean countries are in the process of establishing
registration systems and require support from the international community to
82 Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela
strengthen and scale up those systems. In consultation with governments,
registration procedures will need to continue to be reinforced across the
Caribbean to facilitate identification and referral of persons in need of protection.
Without these systems in place, tailoring specialized services for particularly
vulnerable persons is challenging.
• Few refugees and migrants from Venezuela have legal assistance or access to
information to orient them on their rights, obligations, and administrative
procedures. The need to enhance communication with refugees and migrants from
Venezuela through outreach, feedback mechanisms, and information provision
about services and rights, in English, Spanish, Dutch and indigenous languages,
have also been raised as a priority need.
• Receiving communities are also under increased strain and show signs of
emerging discrimination and xenophobia due to the lack of local communities’
understanding of the reasons behind the arrival of refugees and migrants from
Venezuela. In addition, the language barrier in the non-Spanish speaking
Caribbean countries also has a strong negative effect on socio-economic and
cultural inclusion in all realms of life.
• Access to safe and dignified work and livelihoods opportunities remains a
challenge. Most refugees and migrants from Venezuela in the Caribbean do not
have access to the right to work. Many are therefore unable to access the formal
labour market and resort to working in the informal sector, where they are exposed
to discrimination, abuse and exploitation. Partners have noted that there are few
vocational training or accredited education programmes and limited access to
financial services and/or micro-credit for entrepreneurs. Meanwhile, issues have
also arisen regarding the recognition of academic and professional credentials in
host countries.
• Local authorities’ capacity and resources to absorb and guarantee adequate
access to basic services for new and recent arrivals are overstretched.
Throughout the sub-region, public services, such as health and education, have
been put under pressure to respond to the additional demand resulting from the
presence of refugees and migrants from Venezuela, further to the needs of the
host populations.
• In some countries, the overall legal framework and related policies, procedures
and administrative systems need to be strengthened to accommodate the new
situation resulting from the arrival of Venezuelans and, in some cases, the return
of their own nationals from Venezuela. For instance, there is a need in some states
to develop or improve standard operating procedures (SOPs) for registration,
identification, documentation and referral of victims of human trafficking, as well as
Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela 83
Areas of Intervention,
Country Objectives and Priorities
To meet the needs of refugees and migrants from Venezuela, as well as host
communities, RMRP partners will focus on fulfilling immediate assistance and
protection needs of new and recent arrivals, while incorporating transition initiatives
and comprehensive solutions from the outset. Over 141,000 refugees and migrants
to ensure that refugees and migrants arriving by air, land and sea – including
irregular arrivals – can enter and seek protection and are protection from forced
return, including whilst in detention.
• Improved coordination and communication with government officials and with
partners needs to be enhanced to ensure that interventions are complementary to
government plans and in line with international protection standards. Increased
awareness of migrants’ rights, refugee protection, and recognizing and assisting
vulnerable populations is needed.
are expected to be reached through interventions under this Plan. In addition, the
Caribbean sub-regional Plan will also take into account the needs of local communities
and strives to ensure that social cohesion is maintained through delivery of improved
quality of services. A degree of flexibility will be maintained, should contextual changes
or regional policy developments arise, necessitating stakeholders to adapt their
respective responses within the Plan’s parameters.
DIRECT EMERGENCY ASSISTANCE
• Partners will address information needs by conducting harmonized and joint
needs assessments, data collection and analysis on human mobility and
emerging trends, and profiling and mapping of specific needs of new and
recent arrivals.
• Standard operating procedures and referral systems will be developed to
handle the specific protection and assistance needs of the most vulnerable. This
will enable governments and partners to improve the facilitation of access to
specialized assistance.
• Given the increasing number of arrivals, enhancing reception conditions by
providing basic assistance and services is being given priority both in urban
settings and border areas. Through multipurpose cash assistance, extremely
vulnerable refugees and migrants from Venezuela will be able to cover their basic
needs and afford them the freedom of choice and to maintain their dignity.
Temporary shelter will provide much needed protection to women, girls, men and
84 Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela
PROTECTION
boys. Food/nutrition assistance and non-food items (NFI) will be provided to the
most vulnerable. Water, Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH) services will be delivered,
to improve access to safe drinking water and sanitation. Complementary education
in emergency programmes, such as learn and play and early childhood
development activities, will be conducted for children. Civil society actors will be
supported to identify persons living with HIV and ensure that they are provided with
appropriate assistance.
• To facilitate the reception of refugees and migrants from Venezuela, partners will
work closely with governments to promote access to territory, identification,
documentation, asylum and regular status, while ensuring that protection
safeguards are in place.
• Partners will identify and address gaps in the prevention and response to GBV
and human trafficking, by mapping available services and identifying partners to
provide appropriate direct assistance and services.
• To ensure refugees and migrants from Venezuela are aware of their rights and
responsibilities, partners will establish free-of-charge legal assistance
programmes in English and Spanish. Attention will also be paid to the risk of
statelessness, especially for children born to parents who are undocumented in
the host country or whose births were not registered with the national authorities.
• To promote evidence-based protection interventions at the national and Caribbean
levels, partners will gather data on vulnerabilities and needs in a coherent and
harmonized manner, in line with data protection principles, and disseminate
analysis to improve the response.
• Through strengthened case management, partners will assist vulnerable
refugees and migrants from Venezuela – especially GBV survivors, victims of
human trafficking, lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex (LGBTI)
persons, unaccompanied and separated children (UASC), and others with specific
needs – to receive specialized services and provide them with access to support
spaces.
• Given the existing legislation, policies, structures and programmes to identify and
respond to human trafficking, protection and prosecution procedures will be
reviewed and strengthened to ensure that international standards are applied.
Training of key front-line actors in the identification, referral, and protection of
victims of human trafficking will be critical for the provision of comprehensive
services.
Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela 85
SOCIO-ECONOMIC AND CULTURAL INTEGRATION
• Community-based protection has been determined to be the most appropriate
modality for engagement with refugees and migrants from Venezuela and
communities hosting them. Activities will support and build upon existing family and
community-based protection mechanisms, strengthen grassroots organizations,
promote community self-management and two-way communication avenues.
Partners will engage proactively in interventions to promote awareness on rights
of refugees and migrants, and strengthen self-reliance through identifying
structures, resources, and resilience within host communities and Venezuelan
populations.
• While the response to the situation of refugees and migrants from Venezuela is still
in its early stages, efforts are already being pursued to identify comprehensive
solutions, including short to medium-term social inclusion and self-reliance, with
access to formal employment and livelihood opportunities key components.
Partners will examine informal barriers to employment and develop strategies and
programmes to address them. They will advocate for and support the government
to include particularly vulnerable people in government livelihoods programmes.
Furthermore, they will support refugees and migrants from Venezuela as well as
vulnerable host community members to develop income-generating opportunities,
set up micro-businesses, and provide support for agriculture, livestock, and fishery
activities. Tailored vocational training as well as business knowledge transfer and
experience sharing, to increase refugees and migrants’ capacity to access
employment opportunities and income-generation initiatives will also be provided.
• An important pillar of the response is to contribute to creating a welcoming
environment for refugees and migrants from Venezuela. Increasing public
understanding of, and solidarity with, the situation of refugees and migrants from
Venezuela will be vital for successful integration and peaceful coexistence.
Activities to prevent xenophobia and discrimination will be implemented in the
sub-region through awareness campaigns in host communities impacted by the
arrival of refugees and migrants from Venezuela.
CAPACITY STRENGTHENING
• The response builds on existing government capacity and infrastructure.
Necessary human resources, technical support and equipment will be provided
where required, to improve reception facilities, strengthen registration,
regularization and documentation processes, promote access to asylum
procedures, provide complementary legal pathways, and find alternatives to
detention for asylum-seekers. A substantial part of assistance under this Plan will
86 Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela
• Sensitization and awareness of key actors such as police, immigration, judiciary,
and other relevant authorities and actors will be prioritized through specialized
trainings, campaigns, and sharing of good practices throughout the region.
• To strengthen host governments’ capacity to deliver services, support will be
provided in the areas of social protection, education, health, and protectionsensitive
border management. In particular, material support and training will be
provided to government officials working in these areas.
• To ensure that Venezuelans can access existing public services, such as health
and education, partners will advocate with states in cases where access is limited.
In order to enable this access, partners will assist the host governments to map
their national services to understand the gaps and address them. Partners will
identify sectors and geographic areas where public services need additional
capacity to serve refugees, migrants, and host community members in order to
channel the appropriate resources, staffing, etc. A national information system
containing information on vulnerabilities and population dynamics in each country
will be developed in parallel to support this process.
• Partners will increase the capacity of local schools hosting Venezuelan youth
by supporting local educational institutions, in terms of material, infrastructure and
support to teachers.
• Support will be given to the governments of the sub-region in establishing
shelters for victims of human trafficking and GBV survivors. These shelters
support victims and survivors by offering them a safe space to live where they
receive continuous psychosocial and material support vital to their healing process.
be channelled through relevant line ministries. Governments will also be supported
to establish SOPs for systematic identification and referral of vulnerable people,
including survivors of abuse and exploitation. Partners will support host
governments to develop contingency plans and enhance emergency
preparedness.
Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela 87
Summary of
Objectives for 2019
DIRECT EMERGENCY ASSISTANCE
OBJECTIVE 1
Produce and disseminate information regarding the profile and vulnerability of
refugees and migrants from Venezuela as well as affected host community, to
relevant stakeholders to improve the response.
OBJECTIVE 2
Ensure refugees and migrants from Venezuela and vulnerable host communities
have access to immediate basic needs, services, and assistance including NFI,
shelter, food, WASH, health (including sexual and reproductive health as well as
GBV related health interventions), and education.
PROTECTION
OBJECTIVE 1
Promote access to territory, alternative legal pathways, and legal aid and justice for
refugees and migrants from Venezuela.
OBJECTIVE 2
Strengthen community-based protection, grassroots refugee and migrant
organizations, and two-way information gathering and sharing.
OBJECTIVE 3
Improve access to specialized services for refugees and migrants from Venezuela
with specific needs such as GBV survivors, victims of human trafficking, UASC and
others.
SOCIO-ECONOMIC AND CULTURAL INTEGRATION
OBJECTIVE 1
Support income generating interventions to improve the living conditions of refugees
and migrants from Venezuela and vulnerable host communities.
OBJECTIVE 2
Create a welcoming environment for refugees and migrants from Venezuela, and
support continued access to existing public services, including education and health.
CAPACITY STRENGTHENING
OBJECTIVE 1
Strengthen host governments’ essential services capacity and delivery, including in
education, health, and social protection.
OBJECTIVE 2
Support policy, procedures, and systems development affecting refugees and
migrants from Venezuela, including victims of human trafficking, as well as host
communities, in compliance with humanitarian principles.
88 Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela
Partnership and Coordination
With the primary leadership and responsibility of the response remaining with the host
governments, which have already deployed substantial resources, this Plan seeks to
support and complement the efforts of national and local authorities. Further
engagement with regional coordinating bodies such as CARICOM will be pursued.
The Plan seeks to establish and strengthen linkages with the broader humanitarian,
social, and development initiatives already being implemented throughout the subregion,
such as the Multi-Country Sustainable Development Framework (MSDF) and
national development plans, to ensure complementarity of actions and to enhance
efficiency, effectiveness, and the search for solutions. Moreover, it is also aligned
with the Brazil Plan of Action and the Caribbean Migration Consultations (CMC).
The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and the International
Organization for Migration (IOM), as co-leads of the Inter-Agency Coordination
Platform at regional level, are engaging closely with a wide range of actors working
across the Caribbean to continue to build partnerships and ensure ongoing
coordination with all stakeholders, with the aim to increase the overall effectiveness
and impact of inter-agency interventions. Mirroring the Regional Platform, regular
thematic coordination meetings will be hosted with partners in the Dominican
Republic, Guyana, and Trinidad and Tobago to support the authorities’ efforts to
respond to the situation and with the objective of avoiding gaps and duplications,
addressing obstacles, and ensuring protection as well as predictable assistance
delivery to those in need. The coordination fora in the different countries are being
adapted to the situational context and operational needs of actors in each location,
taking into account existing mechanisms in place and leveraging the expertise of
agencies that are present in the sub-region. Within these fora, partners will ensure that
common assessments, monitoring and reporting on progress, as well as
communication and information-sharing tools are put in place in coordination with the
governments and relevant stakeholders.
In addition, the national platforms will work closely with the UN Resident Coordinators
covering the Caribbean countries and territories impacted by the situation to ensure
cohesion between the various coordination structures that are already are in place.
Through the RMRP and its monitoring framework, regular updates will be provided to
donors and key stakeholders.
CENTRAL AMERICA
AND MEXICO SUBREGIONAL
REFUGEE
AND MIGRANT
RESPONSE PLAN
Central America and Mexico
153,800
Refugees and
Migrants in Need
117,900
Refugees and
Migrants Targeted
9,180
Target Host
Community
USD 22M
Financial
Requirements
San José
México
Panamá
BELIZE
COSTA RICA
CUBA
GUATEMALA
HONDURAS
CAYMAN
ISLANDS
MEXICO
NICARAGUA
PANAMA
EL SALVADOR
±
Regional Population Movements
17
RMRP
Partners
Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela 91
Introduction -
Background and Achievements
In the past decades, Mexico and Central America has been a region of transit and
destination for thousands of refugees and migrants from diverse countries. In more
recent years, in view of ongoing political, human rights, socio-economic, and public
order circumstances in Venezuela, an increasing number of refugees and migrants
have left their country and reached Central America/Mexico, looking for protection and
better opportunities in countries such as Costa Rica, Mexico and Panama. Despite
refugees and migrants from Venezuela having to face additional challenges to reach
these countries in terms of logistics, migratory restrictions, and cost of living, it is
estimated that by the end of 2019, the number of refugees and migrants from
Venezuela living in Costa Rica, Mexico, and Panama will increase to a total of 191,000
people. Of these 153,800 will be in need of assistance and almost 118,000 will be
directly targeted by the interventions prioritized under the RMRP. The large majority
of Venezuelans arrive in Mexico and Central America by air, although arrivals through
Panama’s southern border with Colombia have slightly increased in the second
quarter of 2018 as well. There are also secondary movements from Costa Rica to
Panama.
Since October 2017, Venezuela has been included in the list of countries that require
a visa to enter Panamanian territory. Despite these restrictions, Panama continues to
be the main destination for refugees and migrants from Venezuela in Central America,
hosting an estimated 94,000 people as of the end of October 2018. Panama has
established by executive decree a system that allows to apply for regular status during
specific periods, open to all nationalities. Up to November 2018, according to
Panamanian migration authorities, 37,031 Venezuelan people had signed up in the
latest period. This regularization pathway has, however, certain requirements
regarding documentation and cost which makes it inaccessible to many Venezuelans.
In addition, Panama has not included the Cartagena definition in its refugee decree,
resulting in many Venezuelans being rejected at the admissibility stage of the refugee
status determination procedure.
In Mexico, the number of temporary and permanent resident cards issued or renewed
for Venezuelans between January and September of 2018 was over 13,900, a 24 per
cent increase compared to same period in 2017. The issuance of visit cards for
humanitarian reasons48 increased from 180 in 2016 to 1,650 in 2017, and 3,120 in
2018 as of the end of September. An estimated 39,500 Venezuelans are in Mexico as
of the end of October 2018. Mexico has included the Cartagena definition in its refugee
decree and the recognition rate of Venezuelan asylum seekers is 97 per cent. Mexico
48 These permits are granted to applicants of asylum, for humanitarian or public interest reasons.
92 Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela
also provides complementary protection to those that do not fall within the refugee
definition, but cannot be returned to their country of origin.
In 2017, over 8,800 Venezuelans were regular residents in Costa Rica, of whom over
2,300 were permanent. Including asylum-seekers and persons with other migratory
status, it is estimated that there are 25,000 refugees and migrants from Venezuela in
the country as of the end of October 2018. Costa Rica generally does not apply the
Cartagena definition to Venezuelans, resulting in recognition rates of Venezuelans of
under 10 per cent, although recent judicial decisions open the possibility to apply the
broader definition on a case-by-case basis. In addition, to date, no pathway to
regularization has been opened, although discussions are underway on the possibility
of opening such a pathway through an executive decree.
According to consultations with humanitarian and development partners in the region
many refugees and migrants from Venezuela who enter Mexico and Central America
regularly have difficulties extending their stays and fall into irregular status due to lack
of information and options for regularization. This in turn increases the vulnerability of
refugees and migrants from Venezuela who cannot access health and education
services and resort to working in the informal sector. An increasing number of victims
of human trafficking with Venezuelan nationality have also been identified, particularly
in Mexico and Panama.
Xenophobic discourse is also on the rise among host communities due to the demands
that the increasing number of refugees and migrants from Venezuela as well from
other countries place on resources and services. In a region with significant mixed
population flows, refugees and migrants from Venezuela are confronted with a feeling
of overstretched basic services and a saturated aid system, as host communities
received many people from different countries searching for a better life or protection.
In the case of Mexico, the recent caravans of people from the Northern Triangle have
exacerbated these feelings.
RMRP partners in Mexico and Central America will work to continue supporting
governments in collecting and analyzing data on human mobility and the needs of
refugees and migrants from Venezuela. The Plan will assist governments to further
ensure that refugees and migrants are adequately protected, and have access to basic
needs and assistance. The planned activities will focus particularly on involving host
communities, but also Venezuelan diaspora established in the region, in supporting
the socio-economic and cultural integration of refugees and migrants from Venezuela.
Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela 93
Joint Needs Analysis
The response strategy is based on the needs detailed below, which were identified
through a series of workshops with humanitarian and development actors conducted
throughout the region in late 2018. RMRP partners have conducted profiling and other
data collection exercises in order to better assess the profiles and needs of refugees
and migrants from Venezuela in the three countries.
• Data collection exercises undertaken by partners indicate that over 90 per cent of
the refugees and migrants from Venezuela who arrived at the sub-region have
come by air. While their socio-economic status may generally be a little higher than
those arriving into other countries by land routes, their protection needs are largely
similar. The main needs identified include information about and effective access
to territory (prevention of refoulement), access to asylum and regular status,
as well as other legal pathways, access to documentation (identification
documents, criminal record, certificates, etc.), and equal access to justice and legal
services. For example, during a data collection exercise in Costa Rica, over 80%
of interviewees stated legal assistance as the first and main need.49 In Mexico,
during a similar exercise, 60% of interviewees who indicated having requested
asylum did not have a document indicating such claim, despite the law establishing
that asylum seekers must receive a humanitarian visa.
• Access to health care was identified as a major need following the data collection
exercises carried out in the three countries, especially with regards to treatment of
communicable diseases, sexual and reproductive health services, life-saving
drugs, anti-retroviral human immunodeficiency virus and acquired immune
deficiency syndrome (HIV/AIDS) treatment, psychosocial support, and
vaccinations.
• Access to support networks and telecommunication services (including Wi-Fi
services) is deemed important in terms of access to information on basic services
and the humanitarian response available.50 Although some information is available
at border points of the countries concerned, the availability and quality of
information on rights, responsibilities, access to asylum and regular status has to
be increased.
• Major protection threats and risks are linked to smuggling and human trafficking.
During 2018, partners in the region have recorded an increase in numbers of
human trafficking victims from Venezuelan origin, with women and children
49 IOM Costa Rica, Displacement Tracking Matrix (DTM) Round 1 (data collection ongoing at time of writing,
November 2018).
50 Mentioned by humanitarian actors working with Venezuelans during a planning workshop held in San Jose, Costa Rica,
November 2018
94 Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela
especially falling victim to exploitation and sexual abuse, as well as to forced
labour.
• The specific needs of unaccompanied and separated children (UASC), survivors
of gender-based violence (GBV), lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex
(LGBTI) persons, women and children at-risk, and other vulnerable individuals will
need to be taken into account, including through family reunification and
violence prevention interventions. In general, partners have noted growing
vulnerabilities, with more persons at risk or having acute needs as the situation
protracts. Continued communication with refugees and migrants through outreach,
information about protection services, and effective referral mechanisms will
therefore be of utmost importance.
• The results of the data collection exercises in the region show that a significant
percentage of Venezuelans arrive with high skills. For Instance, in Costa Rica
almost half of the interviewees possess a university degree.51 However, access to
safe and formal employment and livelihoods opportunities remains a
challenge, as underlined by all partners in the sub-region. For example, in Costa
Rica around 80 per cent of the interviewees who work are part of the informal
sector, without a proper work contract and thus exposed to abuse and
exploitation52. In Panama, asylum-seekers are not allowed to be formally employed
as they are not granted a work permit until a formal decision has been taken on
their individual asylum claim. In addition, during a data collection exercise in
Panama, almost one in four of interviewees declared that they had received less
than the agreed salary at least once.53
• The main needs related to socio-economic integration identified in Central America
and Mexico include access to documentation (permanent residency, work
permits, etc.), access to education (including recognition of professional and
academic certificates), access to livelihoods (financial services, vocational, and
technical training, etc.) access to dignified shelter/housing, access to health,
and social security services, and information on availability of social
programmes / safety nets.
• There is a perception amongst host communities that authorities and civil society
have overall limited resources and capacity to absorb the new arrivals, leading to
rising discrimination and xenophobia. In this context, there is a need to scale-up
prevention and mitigation initiatives against discrimination and xenophobia.
51 IOM Costa Rica DTM Round 1 (DTM, data collection ongoing at time of writing, November 2018).
52 Ibid.
53 Joint data collection exercise by IOM, UNHCR, UNICEF, and the OAS, based on 1,200 interviews with Venezuelan refugees
and migrants (August – October, 2018, publication forthcoming at time of writing, November 2018).
Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela 95
• In Costa Rica, Mexico and Panama, some legal frameworks and related
policies, procedures and administrative systems need to be strengthened to
accommodate for the arrival of refugees and migrants from Venezuela. In Panama
for instance, progress was made in advancing asylum regulations by including
fundamental principles for protection and provisions for attention to children and
adolescents. Despite these modifications, other aspects of the recently-approved
regulation remain of concern, namely the inclusion of a six-month deadline to seek
asylum.
• Partners have observed a need to increase awareness among first line
responders including police, health workers, educators, as well as immigration
officials, judiciary, and other relevant authorities and actors, on refugee protection,
migrants’ rights, and recognizing and assisting vulnerable populations.
• A number of elements need to be guaranteed to support an effective response and
to ensure maintenance of protection standards, including coordination between
institutions for the identification and referral of cases with international protection
needs, with a focus on age and gender; strengthening of asylum-processing
capacities; strengthening of border management capacity; decentralization of
asylum and migratory regularization processes; capacity strengthening of
education and health public services, in particular in areas hosting refugees and
migrants from Venezuela; strengthening of the institutions in charge of housing
(subsidies for vulnerable cases, temporary shelter); facilitation of access to public
universities; and reduction of the barriers to status regularization (documents,
costs, information).
Areas of Intervention,
Country Objectives and Priorities
In Mexico and Central America, partners will support the governments’ priorities and
response for refugees and migrants from Venezuela, in close cooperation with host
communities and in line with the four RMRP areas of intervention.
DIRECT EMERGENCY ASSISTANCE
• The response will focus initially on ensuring that vulnerable refugees and
migrants as well as host communities have access to basic services including
health, education, communication, food and shelter, among others. Most urgent
needs will be identified through data collection and profiling exercises by partners.
Assistance through cash-based interventions (CBI) will be prioritized in order to
respond in a flexible manner to the needs of the most vulnerable refugees and
migrants.
96 Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela
• Refugees’ and migrants’ access to updated and accurate information about lifesaving
services is essential and will be at the core of the response. Partners will
carry out mapping of the services available to refugees and migrants from
Venezuela. Information provision will be ensured at key border points, such as
Paso Canoas in the case of the border between Costa Rica and Panama, and
international airports in each of the countries. Information will also be distributed
through digital means and social media.
PROTECTION
• Refugees and migrants will be adequately informed about and can effectively
access the territory, asylum procedures, regular status, including other legal
pathways to stay. Legal assistance and orientation will be provided at border entry
points, gathering points for Venezuelan populations and through social media.
Partners will be present to provide guidance on how to access basic services,
including health services and education.
• The response will promote two-way information exchange, and will engage
refugees and migrants in participatory assessments to identify their needs through
various data collection and profiling exercises, as well as focus group discussions
with beneficiaries.
• Information on refugees and migrants from Venezuela, including their profiles and
gender and age specific needs, will be gathered and used for further
programming as well as advocacy with governments and key stakeholders, in
order to improve their protection and reduce vulnerabilities.
SOCIO-ECONOMIC AND CULTURAL INTEGRATION
• Promoting access to formal employment, entrepreneurship and access to health
and education will be a priority to attain effective social and economic
integration. In alliance with partners from the private sector, labour insertion will
be promoted through vocational trainings and support to access credit. Mapping
exercises to match Venezuelan expertise with labour market needs in host
communities will also be carried out.
• Host communities play an important role in promoting the social, economic, and
cultural integration of refugees and migrants from Venezuela in Mexico and Central
America. Their needs and concerns will be considered through participatory
assessments and prioritized interventions at the community level, such as
recreational activities and the improvement of community centres in areas with a
high presence of refugees and migrants from Venezuela. Additionally, anti-bullying
sessions will be held in schools, prioritizing secondary education, where
Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela 97
Venezuelans and other foreigners are enrolled. Furthermore, anti-xenophobia
and anti-discrimination campaigns to reduce tensions between refugees,
migrants, and host communities, and generate positive environments to foster
integration, will be developed in close consultation with host communities.
CAPACITY STRENGTHENING
• In order to promote the sustainability of the response, in addition to sensitizing
national and local authorities, strong emphasis will be put on providing technical
assistance to strengthen migration management and international protection
processes, improve identification and assistance of people with protection needs,
and create or strengthen inter-institutional coordination mechanisms related to
migration and asylum in the participating countries.
• Capacity-strengthening efforts will focus particularly on basic protection
principles, establishment of referral pathways and managing conflicts/tension at
border crossings. Emphasis will be also placed on strengthening the efforts of
governments and stakeholders to counter human trafficking and smuggling.
98 Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela
Summary of
Objectives for 2019
DIRECT EMERGENCY ASSISTANCE
OBJECTIVE 1
Provide assistance to refugees and migrants in vulnerable situations to cover their
basic needs.
OBJECTIVE 2
Guarantee and facilitate access to information about rights, goods, and services that
save lives with a gender, age and diversity approach, and that helps to guide
humanitarian response.
PROTECTION
OBJECTIVE 1
Promote access to territory, to asylum and to migratory regularization.
OBJECTIVE 2
Support identification and referral of cases with specific protection needs and their
access to services.
SOCIO-ECONOMIC AND CULTURAL INTEGRATION
OBJECTIVE 1
Generate opportunities for formal employment, productive resources, and
livelihoods for refugee and migrant population, equal to host community.
OBJECTIVE 2
Promote access to basic rights, particularly education, health, and dignified housing
for refugees and migrants, equal to host community.
OBJECTIVE 3
Promote social cohesion, peaceful coexistence, and non-discrimination in host
communities.
CAPACITY STRENGTHENING
OBJECTIVE 1
Strengthen technical and management capacities of migration and asylum
institutions for the registration, accessing regular status, documentation and
identification of protection needs.
OBJECTIVE 2
Enhance the capacity of government institutions for the identification and assistance
of specific protection needs.
OBJECTIVE 3
Strengthen coordination, management, analysis, and information sharing capacities
at national and local levels.
Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela 99
Partnership and Coordination
With the primary leadership and responsibility of the assistance remaining with the
host governments, which have already deployed substantial resources, RMRP
partners are engaging closely with a wide range of actors working across the region
to continue to build partnerships and ensure ongoing coordination with all
stakeholders.
In order to avoid gaps and duplications, address obstacles, and ensure protection as
well as predictable assistance delivery to those in need, regular multi-sector
coordination meetings are taking place in Costa Rica, Mexico, and Panama
respectively, based on structures that existed before the influx of refugees and
migrants from Venezuela, such as the inter-agency working groups in support to
border territories (Panama) and other coordination mechanisms with partners.
By replicating the Regional Inter-Agency Coordination Platform at the national level in
all three countries, partners will ensure the effectiveness and impact of inter-agency
interventions. In order not to duplicate efforts, specific mechanisms in each country
could vary based on the existing coordination structures and UN Country Teams.
RMRP partners will ensure that common assessments, monitoring and reporting on
progress and communication as well as information-sharing tools are put in place in
coordination with the governments and relevant stakeholders.
Panama City, Panama. A Venezuelan family prepares sweets to sell on the streets. ©UNHCR/ Santiago Escobar-
Jaramillo
100 Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela
SOUTHERN CONE
SUB-REGIONAL
REFUGEE AND
MIGRANT
RESPONSE PLAN
Southern Cone
438,184
Refugees and
Migrants in Need
294,239
Refugees and
Migrants Targeted
USD 35M
Financial
Requirements
D
Buenos Aires
Santiago
Asunción
Montevideo
Arica
ARGENTINA
BOLIVIA
BRAZIL
CHILE
PERU
PARAGUAY
URUGUAY
La Plata
Cordoba
D
Tancredo Neves
±
Regional Population Movements
29
RMRP
Partners
Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela 103
Introduction -
Background and Achievements
Since early 2017, an unprecedented number of refugees and migrants from
Venezuela have left their country and arrived in the four countries of the Southern
Cone (Argentina, Chile, Uruguay, and Paraguay), a trend which is foreseen to continue
during 2019. During the second half of 2018, the number of arrivals has continued to
increase unabated. According to official figures from the governments, it is estimated
that over 247,000 Venezuelans were living in these four countries as of September
2018. It is expected that the total population of refugees and migrants from Venezuela
in the abovementioned countries will reach over 588,000 by the end of 2019, with over
238,000 individuals in Argentina, 337,000 in Chile, almost 1,000 in Paraguay, and
12,000 in Uruguay. Data indicates that most plan to remain in the sub-region.54
Venezuelan nationals have benefitted in Argentina, Chile, and Uruguay from current
migration policies and agreements to regularize their status in the sub-region.
However, increasing challenges in accessing asylum or regular status and therefore,
access to basic rights, have been observed by partners. As of November 2018, over
200,000 residence permits have been granted to Venezuelans,55 and as of October
2018 approximately 3,900 individuals have lodged asylum claims or have obtained
refugee status.56 Others are thought to be in an irregular situation due to the lack of
required documentation upon entry and/or irregular stay. The risk of refoulement in
the sub-region has traditionally been low. There are, however, at-risk cases facing
denial to access the territory due to lack of required documentation. This is specially
the case for Venezuelan children who only travel with their birth certificates without
carrying an identity card or a passport, or those travelling with expired passports.
Challenges in access to asylum and regular status, as well as delays in obtaining
status and/or suitable documentation, limit the possibility to access the formal labour
market and basic services, increasing their economic instability. Whilst Venezuelan
asylum-seekers and those with a residence permit have the right to work in the subregion,
access to formal employment and self-employment are still limited due to the
overall socio-economic context in most countries, a predominant informal sector,
cumbersome recognition of skills/degrees, and limited duration of residence permits.
Moreover, most refugees and migrants reside in capitals; for example in Chile 96 per
54 IOM Chile Displacement Tracking Matrix (DTM) Report Round 1 (July 2018) and DTM Argentina Report Round 1 (July 2018).
55 According to national authorities including the Argentinian Dirección Nacional de Migraciones (DNM), the
Chilean Departamento de Extranjeria y Migracion (DEM), the Paraguayan Direccion General de Migraciones (DGM), and the
Uruguayan Ministerio de Relaciones Exteriores (MRREE) and Homeland Ministry.
56 According to national authorities, including the Argentinian National Commission for Refugees (Comisión Nacional para los
Refugiados), the Chilean Refugee and Resettlement Section of the Migration Department (Sección de Refugio y Reasentamiento
del Departamento de Extranjería y Migración), and the Uruguayan Refugee Commission (Comisión de Refugiados).
104 Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela
cent live in Santiago de Chile,57 in Uruguay 86 per cent reside in Montevideo,58 and in
Argentina 85 per cent are in Buenos Aires,59 where access to adequate and affordable
housing is limited.
Governments have established programmes to guarantee the inclusion of refugees
and migrants, in their societies. For instance, the Government of Argentina has
facilitated workshops on labour opportunities around the country, offering specific
information on the requirements that need to be fulfilled in order to work in Argentina.
The main aim of these is to decentralize the refugee and migrant population, while
contributing to the inclusion, participation, and development of Venezuelans in the
Argentinian society.60 In Uruguay, a migration policy was adopted based on human
rights, promoting social and labour inclusion of migrants in equal conditions to the local
community, while fighting stigmatization and discrimination.61 In the case of Chile, the
government is implementing the Democratic Responsibility Visa (by its Spanish name,
visa de Responsabilidad Democrática), which enables Venezuelans to arrive in the
country with a valid work visa.62
57 Instituto Nacional de Estadísticas (2017) National Census.
58 Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Uruguay (Ministerio de Relaciones Exteriores), (October 2018).
59 Dirección Nacional de Migraciones (DNM) of Argentina
60 National Direction of Migration of Argentina (Dirección Nacional de Migraciones - October 2018)
61 Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Uruguay (Ministerio de Relaciones Exteriores - May 2018).
62 https://chile.gob.cl/chile/blog/venezuela/informacion-sobre-visa-de-responsabilidad-democratica
Buenos Aires, Argentina. Sofia, Carla, and Lara arrived in Buenos Aires from Venezuela some months ago and
discovered their love for music in the Argentinian capital. Sofia (13), as well as Lara (9) dedicate their free time
to practice viola lessons. Carla (11) prefers trombone. ©UNHCR/ Santiago Escobar-Jaramillo
Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela 105
Increasingly, new arrivals reach the sub-region with fewer resources and social
networks. Contrary to most of the refugees and migrants from Venezuela who arrived
between 2016 and 2018 (primarily in Argentina and Chile), of whom a significant
number were young Venezuelans with university degrees,63 recent arrivals include
more families, as well as female-headed households. The profiles of these more
recent arrivals represent a lower income background, different educational assets and
limited family/social networks, which makes them particularly vulnerable to
exploitation, extortion, human trafficking, gender-based violence (GBV),
discrimination, and xenophobia. They are facing challenges in covering their basic
needs and remain dependent on the assistance provided on a case-by-case basis by
some public institutions and partners.
During 2018, partners in the countries have been providing humanitarian assistance,
including temporary shelter, non-food items (NFIs), and psychosocial support to the
most vulnerable cases identified in urban areas. Partners also started promoting
access to asylum and migratory protection-oriented solutions on a small scale. Efforts
in 2018 focused also on tracking population movements, collecting data, protection
monitoring exercises, and participatory assessments, as well as promoting enhanced
local integration prospects and sustainable livelihoods. In 2019, partners’ capacities
will be scaled up to ensure effective actions are taken at operational level while
complementing host governments’ programmes. Actors involved in the response in
the four countries will also focus on enhanced contingency planning, ensuring the
protection space is guaranteed, and that the basic needs of all refugees and migrants
from Venezuela are met. At the same time, improved information management
through the implementation of the RMRP will be instrumental to anticipate most urgent
actions to better respond to the increasing arrivals of Venezuelans.
Joint Needs Analysis
The response in the Southern Cone is based on the projection that the refugee and
migrant population from Venezuela will grow to over 588,000 by the end of 2019.
Among this population, over 438,000 refugees and migrants from Venezuela are
estimated to require assistance throughout the upcoming year, with priority needs
summarized below.
• The basic needs of the increasing refugee and migrant population from Venezuela
in the Southern Cone are diverse, including access to psychosocial support,
63 IOM Argentina Displacement Tracking Matrix (DTM) Report Round 1 (July 2018) and IOM Chile Displacement Tracking Matrix
(DTM) Report Round 1 (July 2018).
106 Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela
nutrition and accommodation. For instance, data collection exercises revealed that
refugees and migrants from Venezuela entering Argentina through the border with
Brazil in Misiones have nutritional needs, and that most reach the border with
almost no money to cover their basic needs and to continue their journey safely.64
• In the capitals where the majority of the refugees and migrants from Venezuela
reside, basic services provided by national institutions are overstretched,
compounded at times by an already fragile economic, environmental, and social
situation. This also applies to host communities at the local level, where
administrative capacities to provide services and ensure access to basic rights are
strained.
• Many refugees and migrants from Venezuela who settled in the Southern Cone,
require medical treatment and access to health services immediately upon
arrival. While the legal framework in all countries at least grants access for
emergency care, as well as for pregnant women and children in all countries,
practical barriers including discrimination often impede effective access. For
example approximately 10 per cent of refugees and migrants participating in data
collection exercises required life-long medical treatment or daily medication.65
• In general, countries of the sub-region are characterized by a legal framework in
line with international refugee law standards and are endowed with administrative
structures and national refugee commissions to adjudicate asylum claims.
However, an unprecedented spike of new asylum applications during 2017 and
2018, which is foreseen to continue, is threatening the quality and efficiency of
the asylum systems and refugee status determination procedures. In
addition, countries of the sub-region have legal frameworks to grant regular status
(temporary and permanent residence permits) with few requirements in terms of
documentation. However, some application fees as well as and medium to longwaiting
procedures due to high demand are among the difficulties Venezuelans
have to face in order to obtain regular status.
• Generally, the Southern Cone countries continue to grant access to asylum
procedures, to regular status, and other legal pathways for Venezuelan
nationals to regularize their stay. Nevertheless, several cases have been reported
of Venezuelan nationals who have not been allowed to file an asylum claim,
particularly at entry points. Government authorities, partners as well as refugees
and migrants have noted the need to provide information and assistance at entry
points, particularly to children and adolescents who do not have any official
64 IOM Argentina Displacement Tracking Matrix (DTM) Report Round 1 (July 2018).
65 IOM Chile Displacement Tracking Matrix (DTM) Report Round 1 (July 2018).
Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela 107
documentation and therefore are entering Southern Cone countries as asylumseekers
while their parents or guardians have a tourist visa.
• Population groups at high protection risk and with specific needs, such as
female-headed households, persons with disabilities, children, those with mobility
challenges, and elderly, are particularly vulnerable and will require access to
specialized services and referrals. Partners have observed that most of their
specific needs are currently being addressed at only a rudimentary level, if at all.
There is an urgent need to provide protection and assistance, including
psychosocial support to these particular population groups, and to strengthen the
involvement and capacities of humanitarian personnel, social workers and
governmental staff to provide adequate responses.
• Medium and long-term response strategies that guarantee the socio-economic
integration of refugees and migrants in the Southern Cone are the most pressing
need of refugees and migrants in the sub-region. Therefore, access to incomegenerating
opportunities is crucial to the socio-economic inclusion of refugees and
migrants from Venezuela. Refugees and migrants from Venezuela have reported
to require an income not only to meet their basic needs, but also to support their
families who are still in Venezuela with remittances (for example 60 per cent of
surveyed population in Argentina). 66
• Across the sub-region, data collection exercises indicate many recently arrived
refugees and migrants from Venezuela in a regular situation have difficulties in
accessing the formal labour market due to the lack of available information on
supply and demand of jobs, few vocational training and accredited education
programmes, and limited access to micro-loans for entrepreneurs. As such,
refugees and migrants from Venezuela resort to working in the informal sector,67
where they are exposed to discrimination, abuse, and exploitation. Refugees and
migrants also experience difficulties in obtaining official recognition for their
academic titles and certificates.
• Financial inclusion also remains a challenge due to the established requirements
for opening a bank account. Obtaining a credit and access to financial and
technical training has been identified as a priority to support both existing microenterprises
and business start-up.
66 IOM Argentina DTM Report Round 1 (July 2018).
67 IOM Chile Displacement Tracking Matrix (DTM) Report Round 1 (July 2018).
108 Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela
Areas of Intervention,
Country Objectives and Priorities
The sub-regional objectives devised for the Southern Cone context closely align with
the overall region’s strategic objectives. Over 294,000 refugees and migrants are
expected to be reached through interventions under this Plan. Under the general
coordination mechanisms, partners aim to provide a comprehensive response for
refugees and migrants from Venezuela with interventions focusing on the below.
DIRECT EMERGENCY ASSISTANCE
• In response to the humanitarian needs of refugees and migrants from Venezuela
in the Southern Cone countries, partners will provide critical and life-saving
humanitarian assistance in the following priority sectors: health services
(including mental health), food security and nutrition, NFIs, and temporary shelter.
• Partners have committed to addressing information and disaggregated data needs,
by conducting harmonized data collection and joint needs assessments,
profiling and mapping of specific needs, rights, goods and services, with a
particular focus on age, gender and diversity of the refugee and migrant population.
PROTECTION
• With protection at the centre of the response, partners will aim to improve access
to territory, documentation, asylum, fair and efficient refugee status
determination procedures, regular status and alternative legal pathways, as
well as legal aid and justice, for refugees and migrants from Venezuela.
• The response will focus on strengthening partners’ presence in border areas,
existing protection networks, the provision of accurate information to
refugees and migrants from Venezuela, as well as strengthening legal aid
provision. In order to anticipate and adapt changes in population flows at the subregional
and national level and its potential impact inside the four countries,
systematic protection monitoring will be carried out.
• Protection responses for persons with specific needs, including children,
elderly, survivors of GBV, lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex (LGBTI)
persons, people with disabilities, and other vulnerable groups will be prioritized, as
well as prevention and assistance to survivors of human trafficking or smuggling.
This will include, for example, the strengthening of mechanisms for the
identification and referral of victims of trafficking and survivors of GBV, as well as
public services to respond to their specific needs, and the establishment of a
dedicated fund to support these persons.
Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela 109
SOCIO-ECONOMIC AND CULTURAL INTEGRATION
• In the Southern Cone, socio-economic inclusion of refugees and migrants arriving
from Venezuela will be a main focus of the response plan for next year. Efforts are
already being pursued to find comprehensive solutions, including short to mediumterm
social and economic inclusion with access to formal employment and
enterprise development as key components. Partners will focus on supporting both
the authorities and communities themselves to increase access to employment
promotion schemes, social protection programmes, livelihoods support. For
instance, mapping will be undertaken to identify sectors where employment gaps
exist which could be filled by the expertise of refugees and migrants from
Venezuela.
• Activities aimed at enhancing access to services such as health care, education,
and adequate housing, are also planned, including through the provision of
services and investments in existing structures which will benefit refugees and
migrants from Venezuela, as well as members of the host community.
• Increased resilience of host communities is key to promoting social cohesion.
Therefore, the promotion of initiatives that are inclusive to both host communities
and refugees and migrants from Venezuela, will be prioritized by partners in next
year’s plan.
• Successful integration will require the continuation and expansion of efforts to
promote peaceful coexistence between refugees and migrants from Venezuela
and host communities, including projects that benefit all populations. Partners will
work on creating a welcoming environment for refugees and migrants from
Venezuela, by addressing stigmatization, discrimination and xenophobia between
and among refugees, migrants, and host communities. Initiatives focusing on
intercultural communication and diversity will be launched at local level, in addition
to wider awareness-raising activities on antidiscrimination.
CAPACITY STRENGTHENING
• In view of the leadership on the response from the governments in the sub-region,
the Plan will focus on capacity strengthening of institutions, policies,
procedures, and systems benefitting refugees and migrants from Venezuela,
returnees, and host communities in compliance with humanitarian principles and
international human rights standards.
• Capacity-strengthening opportunities will be also provided to public officials
focusing on different topics, including coordination, information management,
human rights, international refugee law and refugee status determination
procedures, and migration management.
110 Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela
Summary of
Objectives for 2019
DIRECT EMERGENCY ASSISTANCE
OBJECTIVE 1
Assist refugees and migrants in vulnerable situations to cover their basic needs.
OBJECTIVE 2
Promote the availability of disaggregated data, systematized information, and
analysis of the flows and the immediate needs of refugees and migrants.
OBJECTIVE 3
Promote access to information and guidance for the population of migrants and
refugees.
PROTECTION
OBJECTIVE 1
Promote access to territory, asylum, and regular status.
OBJECTIVE 2
Support the identification, referral, and assistance of refugees and migrants with
specific protection needs, especially victims of trafficking and other types of
exploitation, children, and GBV survivors.
SOCIO-ECONOMIC AND CULTURAL INTEGRATION
OBJECTIVE 1
Facilitate the economic inclusion of refugees and migrants, including access to
formal and/or independent employment, as well as financial services.
OBJECTIVE 2
Promote access to education, health, and other rights for refugees and migrants.
OBJECTIVE 3
Promote dialogue and social integration of refugees and migrants with the host
communities.
CAPACITY STRENGTHENING
OBJECTIVE 1
Strengthen technical and management capacities for the registration, regularization,
documentation, identification of protection needs at the national and regional level
of authorities working on the protection of refugees and migration.
OBJECTIVE 2
Strengthen government capacities in the identification, referral and provision of
assistance to persons with special protection needs.
OBJECTIVE 3
Strengthen capacities on coordination, management, analysis, and information
sharing.
Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela 111
Partnership and Coordination
RMRP partners engaged in this response Plan for the Southern Cone include nine
United Nations (UN) agencies and 16 Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs), civil
society organizations, and other relevant stakeholders. In close coordination with
governments, UN agencies, NGOs, civil society, and the private sector, national
coordination platforms will be established in at least three of the four countries
covered, namely in Argentina, Chile, and Uruguay. The national platforms will promote
and consolidate a comprehensive framework in the Southern Cone to ensure a
sustainable and effective humanitarian, protection, and solutions-oriented response
for refugees and migrants from Venezuela, as well as for host communities.
RMRP partners will also enhance partnerships with National Offices of the
Ombudsperson to secure access to legal assistance and the protection of persons
with specific needs. In addition, partners will seek to diversify partnerships with other
specialized institutions that provide psycho-social support and help to create effective
case monitoring systems for those identified as most in need.
In order to promote local integration and sustainable livelihoods, the national platforms
in the Southern Cone will also coordinate with organizations that advocate for public
policies that benefit refugees and migrants (for example regarding wages, selfemployment,
recognition of academic or vocational degrees, training and financial
inclusion, etc.), to support labour inclusion. At the same time, coordination with local
governments will be strengthened to promote access to social programmes at local
level. RMRP partners will work closely with faith-based organisations and are currently
expanding partnerships with NGOs in the framework of their humanitarian operational
response. Moreover, constructive relationships with academia will be instrumental to
support research and training activities.
112 Regional RMRP for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela
Abbreviations and Acronyms
AoI
CARICOM
CBI
CMC
CSME
CwC
DTM
GBV
GIF
GIFMM
GTRM
HIV/AIDS
IASC
IOM
NFI
MSDF
NGO
LGBTI
Area of Intervention
Caribbean Community and Common Market
Cash-Based Interventions
Caribbean Migration Consultations
Caribbean Single Market and Economy
Communicating with Communities
Displacement Tracking Matrix
Gender-Based Violence
Grupo Interagencial de Fronteras, Spanish acronym for the Inter-Agency Border
Group, predecessor of the GIFMM in Colombia
Grupo Interagencial para los Flujos Migratorios Mixtos, Spanish acronym for
the Inter-Agency Mixed Migration Flows Group in Colombia
Grupo de Trabajo sobre Refugiados y Migrantes, Spanish acronym for the
Working Group on Refugees and Migrants in Ecuador and Peru Human
Immunodeficiency Virus and Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome
Inter-Agency Standing Committee
International Organization for Migration
Non-Food Item
Multi-Country Sustainable Development Framework
Non-Governmental Organization
Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender and Intersex
PEP Permiso Especial de Permanencia, Spanish acronym for the Special Stay Permit in
Colombia
PiN People in Need
PSEA Prevention of Sexual Exploitation and Abuse
PTP Permiso de Temporal de Permanencia, Spanish acronym for Temporary Stay Permit
in Peru
RAMV Registro Administrativo de Migrantes Venezolanos, Spanish acronym for mass
registration exercise in Colombia
RMRP Refugee and Migrant Response Plan
SOP Standard Operating Procedure
SRH Sexual and Reproductive Health
TF – RMRP
Brazil
Task Force for the Refugee and Migrants Response Platform Brazil
TMF Tarjeta de Movilidad Fronteriza, Spanish acronym for Border Mobility Card in
Colombia
UASC Unaccompanied or Separated Child(ren)
UN United Nations
UNHCR United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
WASH Water, Sanitation and Hygiene
Annex 1: Financial Requirements by Organization and Country (USD)
Organization Brazil Colombia Ecuador Peru Caribbean Central
America
and Mexico
Southern
Cone
Regional Total
Action against Hunger 4,800,000 1,837,666 6,637,666
ACAPS 750,000 750,000
Adventist Development and Relief Agency 7,840,000 10,000,000 750,000 587,364 2,972,555 22,149,919
Alianza Venezuela Costa Rica 75,000 75,000
Amnesty International 100,000 100,000
Antonio Vieira Association - Jesuits of Brazil 301,120 301,120
Argentine Catholic Migration Commission
Foundation
260,500 260,500
Argentinian Commission for Refugees and
Migrants
370,700 370,700
Asociación Inmigrante Feliz 215,273 215,273
Ayuda en Acción 700,000 700,000
Blumont 2,073,369 2,073,369
Brazilian Association for the Defense of
Women, Children and Youth
110,720 110,720
CARE 6,050,000 100,000 6,150,000
Caritas Brazil 306,000 306,000
Caritas Germany 391,700 391,700
Caritas Peru 2,894,192 2,894,192
Caritas Rio de Janeiro 160,500 160,500
Caritas Switzerland 250,000 250,000
Caritas Vicaria Pastoral Social 1,317,121 1,317,121
Center for Documentation in Human Rights,
"SMM SJ" Inter-American Platform for Human
Rights, Democracy and Development
123,104 123,104
Centre for Migration and Human Rights 175,000 175,000
Civil Construyendo Caminos de Esperanza
frente a la Injusticia, el Rechazo y el Olvido
120,000 120,000
Cooperazione Internazionale 2,148,828 2,148,828
Danish Refugee Council 5,890,000 5,890,000
Dialogo Diverso 180,000 180,000
Diocese of Lurin 40,000 40,000
Ecumenical Service for Human Dignity 24,000 24,000
Franciscan Solidarity Association 1,090,000 1,090,000
Félix Guattari Institute 90,000 90,000
Foro Salud 110,000 110,000
Fundacion Halu Bienstar Humano 903,000 903,000
Fundacion de las Americas 751,410 751,410
Fundacion Mujer 500,000 500,000
Fundación Scalabrini 120,273 120,273
Handicap International 460,000 460,000
Hebrew Immigrant Aid Society 1,739,244 700,000 2,439,244
Idas y Vueltas 177,478 177,478
iMAAP 1,200,000 1,200,000
Institute for Migration and Human Rights 36,000 36,000
Instituto de Democracia y Derechos
Humanos
43,139 43,139
Illari Amanecer 55,000 55,000
International Labour Organization 3,250,000 1,990,000 40,000 500,000 1,547,890 1,451,570 8,779,460
International Organization for Migration 14,400,118 51,315,600 21,895,896 17,229,472 6,419,944 6,537,899 17,173,497 19,067,162 154,039,588
International Rescue Committee 2,442,000 2,442,000
Jesuit Migration Service 170,000 170,000
Jesuit Refugee Service 315,100 830,561 531,362 1,677,023
Jesuit Service for Migrants 91,970 91,970
Lutheran World Federation 315,000 315,000
Malteser International 500,000 500,000
Manos Veneguayas 314,200 314,200
Mercy Corps 8,410,000 8,410,000
Migrants, Refugees and Argentine Social
Entrepreneurs
38,080 38,080
Misión Scalabriana 1,207,000 595,000 1,802,000
Norwegian Refugee Council 10,180,000 4,000,000 1,150,000 15,330,000
OXFAM 380,000 250,000 630,000
Pan American Development Foundation 1,080,199 3,000,000 4,080,199
Pastoral Service of Migrants 125,000 125,000
Plan International 5,725,000 1,500,000 900,000 12,000 8,137,000
Progetto mondo mlal 250,000 250,000
Programa de Soporte a la Autoayuda de
Personas Seropositivas
108,000 108,000
REACH 628,000 628,000
Red Cross Argentina 665,000 665,000
Red Cross Chile 568,182 568,182
Red Cross Colombia 5,700,000 5,700,000
Red Cross Ecuador 1,230,000 1,230,000
Red Cross Uruguay 476 832 476 832
RET International 2,531,620 1,124,000 1,511,082 697,400 5,864,102
Religiones por la Paz América Latina y el
Caribe
6,000 6,000
Save the Children 11,775,000 1,520,000 95,000 1,250,000 14,640,000
Semillas 80,000 80,000
Social Assistance Foundation of the
Christian Churches
212,121 212,121
SOS Children's Villages of Brazil 1,125,000 1,125,000
Terre des Hommes 520,000 520,000
United Nations Children's Fund 8,940,000 17,382,000 10,484,400 6,448,050 2,210,000 536,800 335,000 6,058,741 52,394,991
United Nations Development Programme 490,000 2,100,000 250,000 710,000 494,366 368,000 4,412,366
United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization
530,000 2,620,000 1,720,000 776,642 10,000 5,656,642
United Nations Entity for Gender Equality
and the Empowerment of Women
1,500,000 1,085,000 880,000 2,250,000 325,000 6,040,000
United Nations Environment Programme 993,250 378,250 1,371,500
United Nations Food and Agricultural
Organization
6,000,000 1,200,000 200,000 7,400,000
United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees
17,278,518 36,000,000 18,420,000 19,500,000 16,250,000 7,666,075 6,480,737 12,404,670 134,000,000
United Nations Human Settlements
Programme
7,000,000 7,000,000
United Nations Office for Coordination for
Humanitarian Affairs
104,000 145,000 313,296 562,296
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime 160,000 1,350,000 680,000 2,190,000
United Nations Office of the High
Comissioner for Human Rights
117,500 1,267,006 1,384,506
United Nations Office for Project Services 215,000 215,000
United Nations Population Fund 903,202 9,243,000 1,200,000 2,756,400 1,333,914 225,000 300,000 682,000 16,643,516
United Nations Programme on HIV and
AIDS
528,000 246,672 63,000 837,672
University of Buenos Aires 161,000 161,000
University of Costa Rica, Faculity of Law 50,000 50,000
University of Diego Portales, Legal Clinic for
Migrants and Refugees
38,636 38,636
War Child 347,000 347,000
Without Borders - Private Assistance
Institution
37,620 37,620
World Food Programme 69,314,982 34,265,741 794,522 390,000 104,765,245
World Health Organization 31,700,000 1,025,631 37,987,470 1,322,308 487,000 72,522,409
World Vision 10,791,000 2,000,000 1,975,000 100,000 252,846 15,118,846
Regional Platform Collective Thematic
Products
3,617,120 3,617,120
Grand Total 56,554,428 315,467,200 117,288,607 106,384,465 34,839,838 21,710,484 35,654,391 49,711,965 737,611,378
Area of Intervention Brazil Colombia Ecuador Peru Caribbean Central America &
Mexico Southern Cone Regional
Direct Emergency Assistance 15,950,351 174,178,150 61,450,128 38,122,229 10,122,948 5,556,607 16,141,333 12,302,491
Protection 8,968,413 35,628,779 12,470,409 12,032,210 7,601,779 4,217,403 6,040,684 13,188,405
Socio-economic and Cultural
Integration 27,518,620 87,173,809 27,677,725 50,117,185 8,628,962 7,280,933 9,685,568 2,846,570
Strengthening the Capacity of
Host Government 4,117,044 18,486,462 15,690,345 6,112,841 8,486,149 4,655,541 3,786,806 5,165,921
Regional Activities 16,208,578
Total 56,554,428 315,467,200 117,288,607 106,384,465 34,839,838 21,710,484 35,654,391 49,711,965
Annex 2: Financial Requirements by Area of Intervention and Country (USD)
r4v.info
