PLAN OF

2019

ACTION


UNITED NATIONS SYSTEM IN CUBA

FEBRUARY

CUBA

PHOTO: BOHEMIA MAGAZINE, CUBA



CUBA PLAN OF ACTION$14.4 millionto respond to the urgent needs of 253,682 people affected by the tornado in the 
14 popular people´s councils that suffered the greatest impact.
CAMAGÜEYLAS TUNASHAVANAPINAR DEL RIOARTEMISAARTEMISAMAYABEQUEMATANZASVILLA CLARACIENFUEGOSSANCTISPÍRITUSCIEGODE AVILAHOLGUINGRANMASANTIAGODE CUBAGUANTANAMO
PRELIMINARY PATH TORNADO

IN HAVANA ON 27 JANUARY 2019



CUBA 

SITUATION OVERVIEW 

On 27 January 2019, slightly more than a year after Hurricane 
Irma hit Havana, Cuba, a severe tornado hit five Havana 
municipalities. The EF4 category tornado (using the Enhanced 
Fujita Scale with a maximum intensity of 5) produced winds 
of up to 300 kilometers per hour and travelled at a speed of 46 
km/h to cut a 400 to 600-meter-wide path of destruction. 

In Havana, a city of more than 2 million inhabitants, the 
tornado swept across the municipalities of Cerro, 10 de 
Octubre, Regla, Guanabacoa and Habana del Este which 
totalized 668,822 in population. From that total, some 253,682 
living in 14 People’s Councils suffered direct impact and have 
been devastated by the damage.

Of the total number of people evacuated, some 9,413 are living 
in the homes of relatives and friends and 524 are in 15 shelters 
authorized by local governments.

Despite the early warning from the Institute of Meteorology of 
the impending complex climate conditions, the impossibility of 
predicting an event of this magnitude and intensity caused the 
loss of six lives and injured 195 persons, leaving over ten people 
in critical condition.

The rapid mobilization of Civil Defense allowed the urgent 
evacuation of the 10 de Octubre Obstetrics-Gynecology 
Teaching Hospital to other healthcare facilities. This maternal 
hospital has the second highest birth rate in the country and 
the highest in the province of Havana. Furthermore, it is the 
provincial centre for underweight (less than 1500g) newborn 
care, intrauterine growth retardation and other perinatal 
conditions.

In the midst of the disaster, with violent winds that tore off 
doors, broke windows and destroyed everything in its path, the 
health staff protected the lives of 195 hospitalized mothers and 
their children, including 14 neonatal patients and four critically 
ill patients.

The population of the affected areas was left without basic 
services of water, electricity, and telephone after the tornado hit, 
with estimates of more than 144,000 without electricity, some 
for more than a week. More than 16,000 telephone service 
complaints were reported and cellphone service and internet 
connectivity were also affected.

Initial assessments point to critical impacts on housing, water 
tanks, electrical services, health institutions and educational 
centres, institutions that store or distribute food, industry and 
other important economic sectors of the country. A week after 
the tornado, more than 200,000 cubic meters of debris had 
been collected from the streets of Havana with reports of more 
than 1,600 fallen trees throughout the devastated area.

Areas with the greatest impact

The national authorities are carrying out assessments in the 
affected municipalities of Havana and the United Nations 
System is consulting with the national authorities regarding 
the extent of the damage in addition to monitoring all public 
and official sources of information.

Given the magnitude of the disaster, data collection on the 
damage continues; however, preliminary estimates now 
indicate that 5,334 homes were affected, of which 505 were 
totally destroyed, 804 had total loss of roofs and 2,210 had 
partial collapse and roof loss. In addition to the havoc 
wreaked on homes, people have also lost basic necessities 
such as mattresses, kitchen utensils, furniture, and personal 
care items.

Critical damage to the electrical distribution system and the 
loss of water tanks and other water collection systems caused 
serious limitations for access to safe water and sanitation in 
these areas. Despite the rapid response of sector authorities 
to restore services, guarantee pumped water and replace 
tanks, people who live in the most devastated areas, where 
household water networks were severely affected, remain 
without access to drinking water. This situation causes an 
increase in the risk of water and vector-borne diseases due 
to lack of hygiene, safe water and deficient hand washing 
practices.

Under these living conditions, it becomes a challenge 
for families to ensure that food is cooked appropriately 
to guarantee adequate nutrition for family members, 
particularly those with special needs, such as pregnant and 
nursing women and children and people aged 65 or above. 

Although pre-cooked food services have been opened in the 
affected area, a broader response is still required to cover 
the basic needs of the victims in general and especially of 
vulnerable groups.

A total of 19 public health facilities suffered serious 
damage, including polyclinics, primary care clinics within 
the community system, nursing homes and pharmacies. 
Although there is medical coverage for the population, there 
are severe losses in the five municipalities, with significant 
structural damage as well as serious losses in medical 
supplies and equipment.

The Obstetrics-Gynecology Teaching Hospital, which 
suffered the greatest damage, serves the population of 10 of 
Octubre and San Miguel del Padrón, where 17 per cent of 
the population of the entire province is concentrated. On 
average, there are 4,400 births in this facility per year.



About 80 school facilities were also affected by the tornado, 
mainly with structural damage and loss in wooden 
construction and roofs. Eleven daycare centres and schools 
have had to be relocated to other facilities in order to 
continue functioning. The continuity of the school year is a 
high priority for the country, and education sector personnel 
have visited affected families where there may be children 
who have been unable to return to school.

Most affected areas 

Five municipalities were hardest hit by the 27 January 
tornado: Cerro, 10 de Octubre, Regla, Guanabacoa and 
Habana del Este1
1. Se reportan también algunos daños en el municipio de San Miguel de 
Padrón.

. The tornado originated in the Casino 
Deportivo district in Cerro, and throughout its course, 
crossed the municipalities of 10 de Octubre, Regla and 
Guanabacoa, heading out to sea through the Celimar district 
in Habana del Este.

It is estimated that its path covers an area of 10 square 
kilometers on a route 20 kilometers long with a 400 to 
600-meter-wide affected area. The greatest damage was 
reported in the municipalities of 10 de Octubre, Regla and 
Guanabacoa (See Map 1 in page 2).

Affected population

A population of 668,822 people live in the five municipalities 
impacted by the tornado.

In particular, 14 People´s Councils (Armada, Luyanó, 
Tamarindo, Santos Suárez, Jesús del Monte, Vista Alegre, 
Guaicanimar, Loma Modelo, Chibás-Roble, Mañana-Habana 
Nueva, Villa I, Villa II, Berroa and Celimar) suffered the 
greatest impacts. It is estimated that 253,682 people were 
directly affected.

Of these, particular emphasis will be given to the more than 
80,000 people located in the tornado’s path and affected by 
partial or total collapse of homes, severe damage to basic 
community health services, education, distribution of basic 
foodstuffs and safe water distribution. Maximum attention 
will be given to some 20,000 critically affected people who 
have either lost their homes entirely or suffered severe partial 
damages or who have lost their basic livelihoods.

Among the most affected are 58,347 vulnerable persons, 
including children under five, pregnant women, and adults 
over the age of 65.

Response from national authorities

The national and local authorities, organized within the 
Cuban Civil Defense System, were immediately mobilized 
on 27 January after the tornado hit. The rapid response 
allowed for the protection of mothers and children in the 10 
de Octubre Obstetrics-Gynecology Teaching Hospital and 
the rescue and aid of people injured in areas impacted by the 
tornado.

A concerted effort was immediately made to restore 
electricity, water and telephone services severely damaged 
by the tornado as quickly as possible. Measures were 
taken to guarantee the distribution of water and food 
in the devastated areas and to intensify sanitation and 
epidemiological surveillance measures. Despite the efforts, 
challenges in services still exist in areas of the greatest 
impact.

The Council of Ministers of the Republic of Cuba conducts a 
daily assessment of the response under the direct leadership 
of the Cuban President. National, provincial and local 
authorities are constantly visiting the most affected People´s 
Councils and various industrial and productive sector 
facilities in an ongoing effort to evaluate the damage.

The network of public health institutions guarantees that the 
population in the areas where services have not been restored 
receive medical care, and specialized personnel guarantee 
psychological support in the People’s Councils, where 
the impact was most devastating. The national legislation 
establishes provisions for salary coverage for victims in times 
of disaster and measures were taken to protect self-employed 
people.

As part of the response, priority is given to the affected 
population’s access to construction materials and water 
storage tanks at subsidized prices. Accelerated construction 
of 212 houses for families who lost their homes has started 
and State institutions have authorized the use of facilities to 
be adapted for housing purposes. National authorities have 
adopted streamlining processes to deliver donations arriving 
for the affected population. The Government of Havana has 
provided two warehouses at the provincial level and ten in 
the most affected People’s Councils to receive donations of 
clothing, shoes, food and other products sent by individuals 
and institutions from within Cuba. The daily distribution of 
donated goods is made with the support of community and 
trade union organizations.

United Nations System Response

To provide immediate support for national efforts, the United 
Nations System (UNS) in Cuba has deployed an immediate 
response strategy. This includes basic pre-positioned supplies 
in the country such as tents (UNDP), food (WFP), ten-liter 
capacity collapsible tanks and school materials (UNICEF) 
which have been made available to national authorities and 
some of which are currently being distributed.

In addition, OCHA, WFP, UNDP, UNFPA and UNICEF have 
activated mechanisms for emergency funds. In the following 
days, these will allow the most affected people in the country 



to gain access to essential supplies such as mattresses, water 
storage tanks, hygiene kits, roofs, tools, supplies and medical 
equipment.

The UNS in Cuba formulated this Plan of Action in 
consultation with the national authorities and their technical 
counterparts. It contains the UNS priorities in accompanying 
the country in the immediate response and early recovery to 
support severely affected people. 

 


PHOTO: CUBADEBATE

PHOTO: INTER PRESS SERVICE



CUBA 

MAIN HUMANITARIAN 
NEEDS

HEALTH

• Ensure access to emergency services and primary care in temporary shelters.
• Repair affected institutions to ensure the life-saving goal of health services.
• Provide sexual and reproductive health and gender-based violence services to the affected population.
• Provide basic hygiene services for pregnant women and their families.
• Monitor water quality in the health institutes.
• Implement epidemiological surveillance activities to prevent epidemic outbreaks of water and vector-borne diseases.
• Intensify health promotion activities to increase the perception of health risks.


WATER, SANITATION AND HYGIENE

• Prevent morbidity and mortality caused by deficient water quality and sanitation.
• Prevent diarrhea, water and vector-borne diseases in communities and schools.
• Distribute safe water and the means for its treatment, storage, and instructions for its proper use.
• Re-establish water service in health institutions (hospitals, polyclinics, outpatient clinics and family nurse services).


FOOD SECURITY

• Improve availability and access to food for victims, especially the most vulnerable, to complement the assistance provided by the 
government and avoid negative impacts on nutritional status.
• Procure a crane for unloading grain at the port, mainly wheat for the Regla municipality flour mill, the only bread and basic food supplier for 
the capital and western region population.


EDUCATION

• Immediately adapt appropriate temporary spaces as classrooms.
• Distribute educational and recreational materials that contribute to a return to school.
• Rehabilitate affected educational center infrastructures and restore basic water and hygiene services.
• Provide socio-emotional support for the recovery of affected children and adolescents.
• Disseminate key messages and information in educational centres to promote health and hygiene aimed at preventing the spread of water 
and vector-borne diseases.


EARLY RECOVERY AND HOUSING





Immediate response to create basic livability and recovery in the affected central areas of Havana will be complex and expensive. These are 
densely populated areas with compact urbanization and adjoining multiple story buildings that mostly date back to the nineteenth century. Many 
are very deteriorated, putting buildings that remain standing at a high risk.

• Provide immediate shelter solutions for those who have lost their homes, roofs or suffered partial damage to their homes, many of whom have been 
evacuated to the homes of relatives, neighbors or state-owned shelters.
• Fast delivery of non-food items (mattresses, sheets, towels, kitchen kits) to the most affected, prioritizing vulnerable groups.




• Increase the structural integrity of buildings with partial collapses, total or partial roof loss and loss of doors and windows through provision 
of safe roof solutions and other durable construction materials.
• Provide access to basic construction materials for immediate response and early recovery by promoting their production at the local level, at 
low cost and using recyclable debris.
• Manage the debris generated by the collapse of buildings and the recovery process through recycling and prioritizing its use in the local 
production of construction materials.
• Recover local production and service capacities, including the necessary means of production to generate employment opportunities 
for victims; this includes management and recycling of rubble, local production of construction materials and job opportunities in the 
construction sector linked to reconstruction activities.
• Bolster the capacity of local governments and key entities in support of national efforts in response and early recovery; the complexity of the 
recovery process in this context highlights the need to strengthen technical advisory services and procedures in the construction process, as 
well as the control of urban, legal and investment processes.


In addition, the following has been identified from the productive sector:

• Provide immediate solutions for the recovery of productive capacities.
• Recruit workers to the affected production centers.
• Support safe reconstruction of roofs, windows and doors.
• Allow access to teams to recover materials from the state and residential sectors.
• Support the production sector, where manufacturing processes were severely damaged.







PHOTO: INTER PRESS SERVICE



CUBA 

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES 

1. DURING THE RESPONSE, PROVIDE SUPPORT TO THE MOST AFFECTED FAMILIES IN THEIR IMMEDIATE NEEDS AS WELL AS THE RECOVERY OF 
BASIC LIVABLE CONDITIONS IN THEIR HOMES AND COMMUNITIES.

• Distribute basic necessities to families who have lost their homes and basic belongings.
• Support the immediate restoration of basic livable conditions of the affected houses.
• Create storage capacities for safe water for human consumption to prevent morbidity and mortality caused by water 
vector-borne diseases.
• Contribute to covering the basic needs of personal and family hygiene.
• Deliver complementary food rations (four pounds of rice and two pounds of beans per month for three months), focusing 
on families with vulnerable members to avoid nutritional status deterioration. 
• Deliver educational materials to meet the basic needs of children in educational centers.
• Support the provision of emergency health services, including sexual and reproductive health services, and contribute to 
preventing gender-based violence and caring for its victims.


2. SUPPORT THE EARLY RECOVERY AND RESTORATION OF SERVICES THROUGHOUT THE 14 AFFECTED PEOPLE´S COUNCILS.

• Rehabilitate damaged homes with sustainable and safe construction solutions.
• Strengthen the capacity to demolish, collect, handle and recycle debris to produce local construction materials.
• Increase the working capacity of the house reconstruction brigades.
• Revitalize micro industries to produce local construction materials in the affected areas.
• Support the restoration of health services in the affected areas, including sexual and reproductive health.
• Rehabilitate school infrastructure, including water and sanitation systems.
• Restore transshipment operations in the Regla port through the replacement/repair of the crane that transports grain to 
the milling company.








CUBA 

RESPONSE STRATEGY 

This Plan of Action includes the mobilization of $14,391,461 
to respond to the urgent needs of 253,682 people affected 
by the tornado in the 14 People´s Councils that suffered 
the greatest impact. Actions in the Water, Sanitation 
and Hygiene, Education, Health (including sexual and 
reproductive health), Food Security and Early Recovery and 
Housing sectors are included. A multi-sectorial response 
approach has been designed to guarantee a comprehensive 
benefit to families with humanitarian needs. 

This Plan of Action has been formulated in consultation with 
national authorities. The planned actions complement the 
government response and include provision of the critical 
basic needs of the most affected families while strengthening 
the processes to restore housing conditions, recover basic 
services, and reactivate economic activity through micro 
industries. 

The short term response actions will be executed within six 
months, while the medium and long term processes of early 
recovery, rehabilitation and reconstruction will take between 
12 to 18 months. However, correspondence between the UNS 
and national counterparts calls for these actions, especially 
early recovery, to occur at the earliest time possible. This 
strategy is particularly valid given the complexity of the 
emergency due to densely populated areas, compact 
urbanization with adjoining buildings, buildings of several 
floors and old buildings in precarious states of deterioration.

RESPONSE ACTIONSSHORT TERMMAXIMUM 6 MONTHSREHABILITATION AND RECOVERY ACTIONSMID TERMUP 12 TO 18 MONTHSRECONSTRUCTION AND RESILIENCE PROCESSLONG TERM> 18 MONTHSTIMELINE

Although one of the main target groups are families whose 
homes were totally or partially destroyed (approximately 
20,000 people), the plan includes actions that will benefit 
extended groups of victims in terms of provision of drinking 
water, food delivery, and access to education during 
emergencies, among others. Health sector actions also 
extend to broader population groups, as they are intended to 
serve populations near the most affected areas. In all cases, 
special attention will be given to priority groups such as 
children under age five, pregnant women and adults over 65 
years of age.

All the interventions have been designed with a multi-
sectorial approach in accordance with international 
protection standards and a gender-based approach.

AFFECTED PEOPLE AND BENEFICIARIES

253,682TORNADO AFFECTED POPULATION14.4MTOTAL REQUIREMENTWATER, SANITATIONAND HYGIENE$2,775,637$747,824$515,000$310,000EARLY RECOVERYAND HOUSINGFOODSECURITYEDUCATIONHEALTH* Health sector beneficiary population 
can be expanded to 525,990 and includes 
188,014 beneficiaries of sexual 
and reproductive health.
peopleTarget people668,8222253,682*
253,68235,00012,584EARLY 253,682TORNADO AFFECTED POPULATION14.4MTOTAL SANITATIONAND HYGIENE$RECOVERYAND HOUSINGFOODSECURITYEDUCATIONHEALTH* Health sector beneficiary population 
can be expanded to 525,990 and includes 
188,014 beneficiaries of sexual 
and reproductive health.
EDUCATIONWATER, SANITATIONAND HYGIENEHEALTHAffected peopleTarget people668,8222253,682*
253,68235,00012,584EARLY RECOVERYAND HOUSING80,000FOODSECURITY60,000
BENEFICIARIES BY SECTOR

11
2. Health services have been affected in 6 municipalities in the heavily hit area, including San Miguel del Padrón. 

 



AFFECTED POPULATION14.4MTOTAL REQUIREMENTWATER, SANITATIONAND HYGIENE$10,043,000$2,775,637$747,824$515,000$310,000EARLY RECOVERYAND HOUSINGFOODSECURITYEDUCATIONHEALTH* beneficiary population 
525,990 and includes 
sexual 
REQUIREMENT BY SECTOR



CUBA 

SECTOR PLANS

HEALTH

$747K 3


Contact: 
José Luis Di Fabio, PAHO (difabiojos@paho.org)

PRIORITY ACTIVITIES

• Restore the operation of critical services, including equipment, medicines and supplies, 
infrastructure and water quality monitoring in institutions.
• Reinforce epidemiological surveillance and health promotion, including mental health 
support to community groups.
• Maintain sexual and reproductive health services, including addressing sexual violence.
• Provide medical care for people living with sexually transmitted infections (STIs) and HIV, 
including care for their families.


RESPONSE STRATEGY 

Direct support will be provided to a population of 525,990 people living in the four municipalities 
most affected by the tornado. The response is aimed at health institutions and the vulnerable 
population of these territories. The most severe damage occurred in one Obstetrics-Gynecology 
hospital, four polyclinics, ten outpatient medical offices and Family Nursing Services, two nursing 
homes, one Pharmacy and one vector unit.

The response will focus on the restoration of comprehensive health services in order to meet the 
most urgent needs of the population and save lives.

Health institutions and Hygiene and Epidemiology Departments will be supported to guarantee 
health, water and sanitation services. Health promotion actions will be implemented, including 
mental health. Prevention and action measures to avoid outbreaks of water and vector-borne 
diseases will be considered a priority, and epidemiological surveillance and preparedness for 
potential outbreaks will be reinforced. 

Childbirth care services and its complications, medical care for sexual violence victims, the supply 
of modern contraceptives and the treatment of people with sexually transmitted infections and 
HIV will be ensured. The continuity of treatments and services for people with chronic pathologies 
and psychosocial and mental health conditions will also be ensured.

Priority groups in the proposal are children, pregnant women, women of reproductive age, 
adolescents, elderly people, and people living with STIs and HIV. 

The UNS Agencies that support the Health sector, PAHO (leading agency) and UNFPA, are 
articulating and coordinating actions according to their experiences and capacities. Priority 
actions will be implemented in close coordination with the Ministry of Foreign Trade and 
Investment (MINCEX) and Ministry of Public Health (MINSAP) at the central, provincial, 
municipal and local levels

Necessary

to benefit 
525,990 
people

11
3. Includes requirements for UNFPA (175,000 USD) and PAHO (572,824 USD) activities. 

 



AGENCY WHO 
PROJECTTITLE 
OBJECTIVESTARGETPOPULATION 
REQUIREMENTSCONTACTResponse to essential public health needs vis-à-vis the emergency caused by the impact of the tornado; 
protect public health and facilitate access to health services.
525,990$ 572,824José Luis Di Fabio: difabiojos@paho.orgSupport the restoration of vital services in the affected institutions.
Strengthen epidemiological surveillance and control, as well as the promotion of health to avoid the 
emergence of vector and water-borne diseases.
AGENCY UNFPAPROJECTTITLE 
OBJECTIVESTARGETPOPULATION 
REQUIREMENTSCONTACTImmediate support and restoration of sexual and reproductive health services in the three municipalities 
most affected by the tornado.
Total: 188,014Women of reproductive age (15-49): 85,950Pregnant women: 3005Adolescents (10-14): 17,903Adult and young men (15-49): 84,161Municipalities: Guanabacoa, October 10 and ReglaTotal: 190,000 USDOwn funds: $ 15,000 
Required: $ 175,000Rafael Cuestas, UNFPA (cuestas@unfpa.org) +53 7204-1512Reduce maternal and neonatal morbidity and mortality by ensuring the basic operational capacity of 
health services, in particular childbirth services and its complications.
Prevent unwanted pregnancies by ensuring access to contraception methods.
Contribute to the prevention and treatment of STIs and HIV.
Strengthen capacities to prevent and address gender-based violence. 
SALUD

WATER, SANITATION AND HYGIENE

$310K


Necessary

to benefit 
35,000 
people

Contact: 
Victoria Colamarco, UNICEF (vcolamarco@unicef.org)

PRIORITY ACTIVITIES

• Provide for the safe and sustainable treatment and storage of drinking water for affected 
families and communities, including instructions for its proper use.

• Promote hygiene practices at the community level, including information on water treatment 
and storage, as well as hygiene practices (hand washing) for preventing health risks related to 
hygienic deficiencies in the context of the emergency.

• Distribute water storage tanks at the household and community level. 

RESPONSE STRATEGY

The tornado’s wind force caused great damage to houses and destroyed supplies of drinkable water for 
families and institutions in five municipalities of the country’s capital, of which three have the highest 
population density in the metropolitan area. After the tornado hit, more than half a million people were 
affected, mainly with power outages and interruptions in the water supply. Additionally, the tornado 
caused great amounts of debris and waste to accumulate in these urban areas.

National and local authorities and the National Institute of Hydraulic Resources lead efforts to restore 
water supply and sanitation services in the communities. The sector is prioritized as part of government 
response initiatives to the risk of rapid propagation of water and vector-borne diseases in the affected 
communities. Immediate progress has been made in restoring electricity service and most of the water 
delivery services have been streamlined through pipelines and water storage tank deliveries to affected 
families. Progress has been made in collecting debris and cleaning streets, while epidemiological 
surveillance by health authorities continues.

A total of 22,500 people currently receive water from tank trucks. To complement the response of 
national authorities, the sector intends to provide support for improving access to safe water and hygiene 
and increase the capacities for sustainable water storage for approximately 11,000 families (35,000 
people) that sustained serious damage to their homes and lost their supplies of drinkable water. A further 
priority is to distribute hygiene kits and hygiene promotion materials at the community level in health 
institutions and schools.

The WASH sector has proposed supporting the prevention of water and vector-borne diseases through 
user-friendly information in addition to providing water storage and hygiene supplies in order to ensure 
that communities and families can cope with the lack of safe water.

In post-emergency contexts, reduced access to safe water for human consumption can cause nutritional 
problems and especially the increased risk of diarrheal diseases and cholera. Improper water storage, 
especially in evacuation contexts, also increases the risk of dissemination of water and vector-borne 
diseases.

A balanced and integrated approach to the WASH sector is essential to prevent morbidity and mortality. 
Recent empirical evidence shows that diarrheal diseases posing a critical risk after a tornado hits are one 
of the leading causes of death and illness in children during humanitarian situations. Almost 90 per cent 
of diarrheal diseases can be prevented through the safe use of water, basic sanitation and proper hygiene 
practices.

To prevent health conditions from deteriorating, the WASH sector prioritizes the distribution of basic 
supplies that help save lives, seeking to build partnerships and expand the coverage of services in the 
most affected areas.



Priority actions will be implemented in close collaboration with MINCEX, National Institute of 
Hydraulic Resources (INRH), MINSAP, Ministry of Education (MINED), and provincial and municipal 
authorities.

AGENCY UNICEF 
PROJECT 
TITLE 
OBJECTIVESTARGETPOPULATION 
REQUIREMENTSCONTACTProvide support for improving access to safe water and hygiene for the most affected families in the four 
municipalities of the province of Havana that were severely damaged by the tornado.
11,000 families (approximately 35,000 people).
$USD 210,000 
$ 160,000 (provision of 660 hygiene kits to cover the basic hygiene needs of 5,000 families in 
emergency situations during a month). 
$ 50,000 (provision of 22,000 10-liter collapsible tanks for water storage, two per family).
Victoria Colamarco, vcolamarco@unicef.org, +53 7208-6094, +53 7208-9791Contribute to preventing and controlling diarrhea, waterborne diseases and other vector-borne diseases 
through improved access to safe water and hygiene for the most affected families in the four municipalities 
with the greatest damage (10 de Octubre, Guanabacoa , Regla, San Miguel del Padrón).
WATER, SANITATION AND HYGIENEAGENCY UNICEF 
PROJECT 
TITLE 
OBJECTIVESTARGETPOPULATION 
REQUIREMENTSCONTACTImprove safe and sustainable storage of drinking water for families who lost their homes as a result 
of the tornado that affected Havana.
1,300 families (approximately 3,900 people).
$USD 100,000Supply 500 liter tanks (one per family).
Victoria Colamarco, vcolamarco@unicef.org, +53 7208-6094, +53 7208-9791Create drinking water storage capacities for affected families to guarantee water consumption and prevent 
morbidity and mortality caused by water and vector-borne diseases.

FOOD SECURITY

$2.8M


Necessary

to benefit 
60,000 
people

Contact:
Paolo Mattei, WFP (paolo.mattei@wfp.org) 

PRIORITY ACTIVITIES

• Support the Government to cover food requirements of the 14 most affected People´s Councils, 
focusing on the most vulnerable groups to avoid deterioration of their nutritional status.
• Improve the capacities of unloading grains from the port, mainly wheat for bread production, 
by purchasing a crane to replace the one that was damaged after the tornado hit.


AGENCY WFPPROJECTTITLE 
OBJECTIVESBENEFICIARIES 
REQUIREMENTCONTACTEmergency food assistance for the 14 People´s Councils most affected by the tornado on 27 
January.
English: TOTAL: $ 2,775,637 
$275,637 for replenishment of pre-positioned food stock (334 MT of food: 223 MT of rice and 111 MT 
of beans). 
$2,500,000 for purchasing a crane.
Paolo Mattei, paolo.mattei@wfp.org, +53 7204-2039Support the Government to guarantee the immediate food needs of the most affected 
communities to avoid the deterioration of their nutritional status, with emphasis on vulnerable 
groups, through the delivery of complementary food rations(four pounds of rice and two 
pounds of beans per month during two months and third month for 1,100 people that are 
considered bankrupt or vulnerable).
Improve the capacities for unloading grains from the port through the replacement of the 
damaged crane previously used for unloading grains, mainly wheat for making bread.
60,000 people (15,000 families) with severe damage to their homes, of which 1,100 are vulnerable 
(pregnant and nursing women and children under the age of five and people aged 65 or above).
SEGURIDAD ALIMENTARIA

EDUCATION

$515K


Necessary

to benefit 
12,584 boys 
and girls

Contact:
Victoria Colamarco, UNICEF (vcolamarco@unicef.org)

PRIORITY ACTIVITIES

• Distribute educational and recreational material aimed at returning to educational activities.
• Provide socio-emotional support and to promote health, hygiene, vector control and disaster 
risk reduction.
• Strengthen the capacities of teachers to provide socio-emotional support for children and 
adolescents.


RESPONSE STRATEGY

Preliminary needs assessments identified by the Ministry of Education have shown that five 
municipalities in the capital have had damage to school infrastructures as a result of the tornado. It is 
estimated that the affected school enrollment is 15,000 girls and boys. A total of 101 educational centres 
(78 schools and 23 day care centres) have damage to their infrastructure and school equipment. The 
Education Sector, as part of the Plan of Action of the UNS and in coordination with the government 
authorities, prioritizes the 52 affected schools of the four municipalities that report the greatest damage 
(10 de Octubre, Guanabacoa, Regla and San Miguel del Padrón).

The Government of Cuba, the Ministry of Education and local authorities are in the process of 
identifying alternative spaces to continue classes wherever possible. In Cuba, because access to education 
is universal and is focused on equity and protection, including gender equality, restoring the functionality 
of the education sector is an essential intervention for the protection and socio-emotional support 
of child victims in the four prioritized municipalities while trying to recover. In this regard, urgent 
actions are required from the UNS to support the Ministry of Education in ensuring the rapid return 
of child victims to safe and protective learning spaces, including the provision of educational materials, 
infrastructure restoration and socio-emotional support.

Returning to classes, in addition to being an important step in the normalization process in post-
disaster situations, also implies that children will have access to the diet included in school nutritional 
programmes. In addition to the immediate actions to guarantee access to education from childhood until 
reaching legal age, it is necessary to repair roofs, windows and sanitary facilities. Attending safe learning 
spaces promotes the empowerment of children within their communities in leadership roles. It allows 
them to promote hygiene practices and other activities such as water monitoring and control of water 
and vector-borne diseases, which pose a high risk in tropical climates after a tornado as a result of the 
accumulation of water and pollution produced by floods.

School attendance also helps mitigate protection risks, since parents are key actors in the recovery efforts 
in their communities. In particular, supporting the return of children under the age of five to school 
allows working mothers the time required to get water and food and return to work.

The Plan of Action proposes activities in the five prioritized municipalities for support in learning 
activities and for social and emotional services that allow 12,584 girls and boys and their teachers to have 
the opportunity to recover from the stress and trauma caused by the tornado.

UNICEF prioritizes the four municipalities with the most severe damage for rehabilitation initiatives and 
the distribution of school materials, which ensures that learning spaces comply with basic standards.

Priority actions will be implemented in close collaboration with MINCEX, INRH, MINSAP, MINED, 
and provincial and municipal authorities. 



AGENCY UNICEF 
PROJECTTITLE 
OBJECTIVESTARGETPOPULATION 
REQUIREMENTSCONTACTRehabilitation of infrastructures in educational centres and day care centres in the most affected 
municipalities.
12,584 girls and boys from the four most affected municipalities (10 de Octubre, Guanabacoa, Regla and 
San Miguel de Padrón).
Total $455,000 
$125,000 (to buy 30,000 m² of waterproof roof sheathing). 
$330,000 (to buy 7,000 m² of aluminum carpentry.
Victoria Colamarco, vcolamarco@unicef.org, +53 7208-6094, +53 7208-9791Support in the recovery of schools and day care centres in affected municipalities by waterproofing 30,000 
m² of ceilings and replacing 7,000m² of woodwork in 52 centres in order to guarantee safe spaces for the 
teaching/learning process.
EDUCACIÓN 
AGENCY UNICEF 
PROJECTTITLE 
OBJECTIVESTARGETPOPULATION 
REQUIREMENTSCONTACTRapid return to safe and protective learning spaces in the four most affected municipalities.
12,584 girls and boys from the most affected municipalities (10 de Octubre, Guanabacoa, Regla and San 
Miguel del Padrón).
$60,000 (to purchase ECD kits, recreational kits and school kits for girls and boys from the most affected 
municipalities).
Victoria Colamarco, vcolamarco@unicef.org, +53 7208-6094, +53 7208-9791Provide educational and recreational materials that foster educational activities and psychosocial support 
when returning to protective learning spaces.

HOUSING AND EARLY RECOVERY

$10M


Necessary

to benefit 
80,000 
people

Contact: 
Soledad Bauza, PNUD (soledad.bauza@undp.org) +53 7204-1493

PRIORITY ACTIVITIES

Immediate response

• Respond to temporary shelter solutions (temporary facilities with tents and partially recovered 
houses that provide shelter to other relatives for their basic necessities) to provide basic living 
conditions for the affected population.
• Distribute essential goods such as mattresses, sheets, towels and kitchen kits to families who 
have lost their homes, as well as to those who were evacuated, prioritizing vulnerable groups.
• Support the immediate restoration of basic community services.


Early Recovery 

• Reduce risk and vulnerability by supporting the early recovery of houses partially or totally 
destroyed, both with materials and construction solutions as well as safe roofs.

• Support sustainable early recovery of basic social services and basic infrastructure, following 
criteria for risk reduction and raising resilience.

• Support the use of local materials and debris recycling to produce construction materials 
destined for recovery in a sustainable and resilient manner.

• Strengthen debris and recycling management capacity.

• Revitalize micro industries for local production of building materials, prioritizing the 
production of materials for walls, floors and ceilings.

• Strengthen the capacity of construction companies and brigades that implement the response 
and recovery actions in housing and basic infrastructure, taking into account the complexity 
of the buildings and collapsed structures and the urban context (central zones and densely 
populated areas) of the affected areas.

• Develop resilient solutions for reconstructing houses and roofs with alternative and 
appropriate technologies.

• Promote the recovery of livelihoods, including the development of productive activities related 
to each municipality according to their endogenous potential.

• Strengthen government and local institution capacity for urban planning, technical advisory 
services and construction procedures, as well as urban, legal and investment process control 
to achieve management of the response and early recovery in a sustainable manner while 
raising urban resilience in the affected densely populated areas.

RESPONSE STRATEGY

The intervention strategy starts by addressing the complexity of an intervention in a densely 
populated urban context. The sector will prioritize the urban areas directly affected by the tornado 
in the People´s Councils of the most affected municipalities, an area hit by the tornado with a force 
of up to 300 km/h across 20 km, resulting in the most severe damage in housing, basic services 
and infrastructure.



Through these actions, the sector expects to benefit the most critically affected population 
residing in this area, estimated at close to 80,000 people. This benefit begins with the 
immediate actions of creating basic conditions of livability with temporary housing solutions 
and basic recovery of infrastructures that would also allow the reception of other affected 
families. At the same time, these families would receive basic necessities such as mattresses, 
sheets, towels and kitchen kits.

Rapid and immediate assistance to the affected population will be provided with the delivery 
of non-food humanitarian goods (mattresses, sheets, towels, among others) and temporary 
shelter solutions (plastic tarps for roofs and temporary roof solutions).

Gradually some families will be benefited with the emergency response and others will be 
benefited with early recovery actions which will arise from the immediate response. This 
includes reconditioned houses with safe roofs; locally produced construction materials; 
handling and recycling debris to allow its use to manufacture construction materials at a 
lower price; and construction brigade services to guarantee the interventions demanded by 
the response and early recovery. These actions will continue throughout the reconstruction 
process. Families will also receive technical services necessary for processing legal documents, 
purchasing construction materials, and processing technical documents for repairs.

The sector has coordinated interventions from several UNS agencies (UNDP, UN-Habitat, 
UNIDO, IOM), which foresee an articulated intervention strategy.

These actions are complemented by those developed by other agencies in the Water, Health, 
Food and Nutrition and Security sectors, which will be offering access to drinking water and 
basic food and medicines in the affected areas.

Likewise, the recovery of local capacities to face early recovery will be supported in a 
sustainable way with provision of materials for housing reconstruction, safe roof solutions, an 
increase in company and construction brigade capacities, resilient building technologies, debris 
management and recycling, the strengthening of local capacities to produce construction 
materials, the recovery of livelihoods based on strengthening productive capacities and 
services, and the recovery of early warning systems.

These actions should be based on land use planning from an early stage to accelerate the 
recovery of the livelihoods of affected people in a sustainable manner. For this purpose, in 
the early recovery phase, UNDP actions will promote technology transfer and the provision 
of resilient building solutions. Local institutions will be supported in territorial planning and 
control as well as technical advice to carry out an efficient and effective response and an early 
recovery process that contributes to increasing resilience.


EARLY RECOVERY, ANTICIPATED FROM THE IMMEDIATE RESPONSE 
AGENCY UNDP 
PROJECTTITLE 
OBJECTIVESTARGETPOPULATION 
REQUIREMENTSCONTACTBetter rebuilding in the municipalities of the capital affected by the tornado.
200 people (managers, professionals, technicians, operators) of the construction brigades and the 
institutions responsible for diagnosing, evaluating and technically assisting the recovery processes in the 
affected municipalities.
12,000 people benefited from the construction efforts. 
23 People´s Councils and three administrative municipal councils have strengthened their capacities in 
early recovery.
TOTAL: $1,200,000Net requirements: $1,200,0001. Improve the response capacity of construction brigades at the municipal and provincial levels, with 
specialized equipment and tools to deal with the reconstruction of homes in the affected areas, includes 
front loaders, multipurpose equipment, dump trucks, concrete mixers, jack- hammers, scaffolding and 
small sized hoisting equipment.
2. Speed up diagnostic services, technical assistance and field work of the institutions that provide these 
services during the recovery to meet the demands of the population more quickly; includes computers 
and diagnostic equipment (The Office of Processing for Housing and Physical Planning).
3. Strengthen capacities in municipal development management with an emphasis on planning and 
finances for early recovery, construction and technical tools for field assessments and information.
Soledad Bauza, soledad.bauza@undp.org, + 53 7204-1493OBJECTIVES1. Support the immediate reestablishment of basic livability conditions of affected houses, prioritizing 
the most vulnerable population (pregnant women, single mothers with minors, elderly people and 
persons with disabilities) to facilitate the fast return of families to their homes.
2. Includes metal tile roof modules, windows, doors and basic tools for the response. 
AGENCY UNDP 
PROJECTTITLE 
TARGETPOPULATION 
REQUIREMENTSCONTACTRestore basic livability of affected homes for families in the municipalities of Havana (10 de Octubre, 
Regla and Guanabacoa).
4,000 homes with living conditions created, allowing families to return quickly to their homes.
12,000 people.
TOTAL: $2,000,000Net requirements: $2,000,000Soledad Bauza, soledad.bauza@undp.org, + 53 7204-1493

INDUSTRIAL EARLY RECOVERY 
AGENCY 
UNIDO 
PROJECTTITLE 
OBJECTIVESTARGETPOPULATION 
REQUIREMENTSCONTACTSupport for restoring the raw materials recovery capacity in the capital.
- People who work in affected industries in the affected municipalities of Havana and consumers of 
products made by these industries.
$1,443,000 
To procure work equipment for the recovery of raw material: 
Three forklifts, 11 trucks and one pick-up truck; trucks to be used to recover metal and non-metal 
scrap in government and private sectors 
Four cranes on a 25 ton truck for handling and hoisting metal scrap 
Two buses to transport workersRecover the productive capacity for recovery of raw materials in the municipalities of 10 de Octubre, 
San Miguel del Padrón, Regla and Habana del Este.
Encourage environmental decontamination, cleanliness and order in the city.
Fidel Domenech, f.domenechlopez@unido.org, +53 7204-1512OBJECTIVESRecover the productive capacity of industries in municipalities affected by the tornado (10 de 
Octubre, San Miguel del Padrón, Guanabacoa, Regla and Habana del Este).
AGENCY 
UNIDO 
PROJECTTITLE 
TARGETPOPULATION 
REQUIREMENTSPeople who work in affected industries in the affected municipalities of Havana and consumers of 
products made by these industries.
$1,500,000 
To procure the following materials and work equipment: 
Light roof sheeting for affected ceilings in factories (fiber cement or metal sheets): 86 449 m2 
Water tanks (500 liters): 4 units 
Windows: 81 units. 
Doors: 280 units 
Light fittings: 14,720 units 
Glass panes for windows: 130,000 m2 
Perimeter fencing: 5,821 mSupport for restoring industrial capacities in affected entities.
CONTACTFidel Domenech, f.domenechlopez@unido.org, +53 7204-1512

sector Plans



