NIGERIA 
REGIONAL REFUGEE 
RESPONSE PLAN 
2019/2020

CREDITS: 
UNHCR wishes to acknowledge the contributions of partners and all staff in the field and at Headquarters 
who have participated in the preparation of the narrative, financial and graphic components of this 
document. 
Layout and graphic design: Cedric Vidonne FICSS/DPSM, Geneva. 
Production: UNHCR, Regional Representation of West Africa (RRWA), Dakar, Senegal. With the support of 
Field Information and Coordination Support Section (FICSS/DPSM). 
The maps in this publication do not imply the expression of any opinion on the part of UNHCR concerning 
the legal status of any country or territory or area, of its authorities, or the delimitation of frontiers or 
boundaries. 
All statistics are provisional and subject to change. 
For more information on the Nigeria crisis go to: Nigeria Information Sharing Portal 
FRONT COVER PHOTOGRAPH: 
Nigerian refugees and asylum seekers in Cameroon’s Far North Region 
UNHCR / Xavier Bourgois

R E G I O N A L R R P > 2 0 1 9 / 2 0 2 0 3 
Contents 
Regional Refugee Response Plan 3 
Foreword 4 
Regional Overview 7 
Financial Requirements 22 
Cameroon Refugee Response Plan 26 
Country Overview 27 
Planned Response 30 
Financial Requirements 39 
Chad Refugee Response Plan 42 
Country Overview 43 
Planned Response 48 
Financial Requirements 59 
Niger Refugee Response Plan 62 
Country Overview 63 
Planned Response 66 
Financial Requirements 75 
Annex 78 
.NIGERIA RRRP

4 R E G I O N A L R R P > 2 0 1 9 / 2 0 2 0 
Foreword 
Five years on, the refugee situation created by the Boko Haram conflict in the Lake 
Chad Basin has not let up, resulting in a protracted displacement crisis. To address 
this multi-dimensional crisis, we recognize the need for a more comprehensive 
regional refugee response that integrates humanitarian, development and peace 
approaches. As we launch the 2019/20 Nigeria Regional Refugee Response Plan 
(Regional RRP), we are committed to applying this comprehensive approach by 
bringing in the best of humanitarian and development planning together. 
Looking back, we can be proud of our achievements made so far. The protection 
and humanitarian assistance Regional RRP partners have provided to Nigerian 
refugees and their hosts since 2015, helped to save lives, improved living 
conditions and already contributed to build the resilience of the affected 
populations. It is now time to broaden the response, as host governments, partners and 
the international community have indeed recognized the need for a longer-term approach 
in the Nigeria/Lake Chad Basin crisis that interlinks humanitarian and development 
planning in a strategic manner. This is in the context where most of the local population in 
refugee-hosting areas already live below the poverty line along with low human capital 
development, gender gaps and with inadequate access to basic social services. 
In 2019/20, Regional RRP partners will work jointly on seeking lasting and durable solutions 
that will benefit refugees and their hosting countries. This is also in line with the Global 
Compact on Refugees (GCR) and its Comprehensive Refugee Response Framework 
(CRRF), as agreed upon by Member States in the 2016 New York Declaration, which 
advocates for a more equitable and predictable burden and responsibility sharing with 
refugee hosting countries. As Regional RRP partners we acknowledge the importance of 
combining our efforts with the collective outcome of improving living conditions of 
refugees and host communities in strengthening resilience and reducing vulnerability. 
When we last launched the 2018 Nigeria Regional RRP, we reported the population in the 
three countries to be 218,000 refugees and aimed to assist 75,000 host community 
members in Cameroon, Chad and Niger. Due to the unrelenting violence in the Lake Chad 
Basin, the number of Nigerian refugees increased in 2018 to 228,500. The horizon for a 
quick resolution of the Boko Haram conflict is offering little hope, with the likelihood of a 
similar increase in numbers in 2019. 
Foreword - NIGERIA RRRP

R E G I O N A L R R P > 2 0 1 9 / 2 0 2 0 5 
For 2019, a total of 40 Regional RRP partners are appealing for US$135.3 million. The top 
priority within the 2019/20 refugee response remains the saving of lives, provision of basic 
assistance to restore the dignity of the affected families, delivery of protection services and 
the improvement of their resilience and that of the host communities. 
A review of the 2018 financial appeal shows that the Nigeria Regional RRP was 42 per cent 
funded against $156.6 million financial requirements by November. The Chad operation 
was funded at almost 100 per cent of its $14.5 million financial needs. By contrast, 
Cameroon and Niger, with five times higher Chad’s financial requirements, received around 
35 per cent. 
We wish to thank those donors who contributed with their financial support and we also 
appeal to them to continue supporting our comprehensive response without which the 
situation of the refugees and host communities would be extremely dire. The quality of our 
multi-sectoral response would greatly improve with a solid funding base across our 
programmes in the three countries. 
As we transition to the sixth year of the Nigerian refugee crisis in the Lake Chad Basin, we 
would like to thank our past and current partners for steering the response forward and 
onward. 
Tire not even in 2019. Leave no one behind! 
Liz Kpam Ahua 
UNHCR Regional Refugee Coordinator for 
the Nigeria Situation and Regional 
Representative for West Africa 
Nana Oumou Toure Sy 
UNDP Sub-Regional Platform Coordinator 
for Western and Central Africa 
Foreword - NIGERIA RRRP

20,000 
99,500 
20,000 
9,000 
15,500 
120,000 
C E N T R A L A F R I C A N 
R E P U B L I C 
N I G E R 
N I G E R I A 
C A M E R O O N 
C H A D 
Refugee locations 
Host population 
Refugees 
Refugee camp 
Refugee crossing 
160,000 
180,000 
200,000 
220,000 
240,000 
Oct. 2016 Oct. 2017 Oct. 2018 
Refugee Population Trends 
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 
65.1 
11 
59 
Regional 0.25 
Niger 
Chad 
Cameroon 
Requirements | in millions US$ 
2019 PLANNED RESPONSE 
228,500 
REFUGEE 
POPULATION 
55,500 
HOST POPULATION 
TARGETED 
US$ 135.3M 
REQUIREMENTS 
40 
PARTNERS 
INVOLVED

R E G I O N A L R R P > 2 0 1 9 / 2 0 2 0 7 
Regional Overview 
Introduction 
As the crisis enters its sixth year, the Nigerian refugee 
situation has become a protracted one with 
humanitarian assistance and response needs expected 
to run well into 2019/20. In 2018, Boko Haram attacks on 
civilians and the related armed conflict continued to 
cause refugee influxes to neighbouring countries. 
Moreover, this conflict, combined with the pre-existing 
social, environmental and climatic conditions and 
exacerbated by resource and governance constraints 
continued to have a negative impact on the livelihoods 
of the affected population. It further disrupted market 
and social services, and deteriorated local economies in 
the Lake Chad region. 
In Niger, counter-military operations led by the 
Multinational Joint Task Force (MNJTF) from April to July 
2018 led to a temporary improvement of the security 
situation. In Cameroon, Boko Haram attacks and 
consequent military operations in border areas continue 
to have a negative impact on access to asylum for 
Nigerian refugees, who are often caught in the middle, 
and forcibly returned to Nigeria. In Chad, restricted 
humanitarian access continues to be the main challenge 
for assisting refugees living in host villages. Due to the 
volatile security situation, over 15,000 new Nigerian 
refugees had been registered in Minawao refugee camp 
in Cameroon as of August 2018. Partners in this Regional 
Refugee Response Plan (Regional RRP) assume that in 
2019 Boko Haram attacks and military counter 
operations by states along the Nigeria border are likely 
to provoke new refugee arrivals in Cameroon, Chad and 
Niger. Given the prevailing unstable security situation in 
some parts of Nigeria’s North-East, in particular in Borno 
State, the prospects for voluntary return in safety and 
dignity in 2019 remain limited for the vast majority of 
Nigerian refugees. 
This refugee situation is set within regions of the Lake 
Chad Basin already characterized by sub-optimal 
economic productivity and endemic poverty. 
Approximately 50 per cent of the host population lives 
below the poverty line in north-eastern Nigeria – far 
below the national average of 33 per cent. For 
Cameroon, the gap is even greater, with 74.3 per cent of 
the population living below the poverty line in the Far 
North region, compared to 37.5 per cent nationally. The 
regions have also witnessed low human capital 
development with significant gender gaps in school 
attendance, all below the national average, due to 
limited provision of basic social services. In the Far North 
Region of Cameroon, the net academic enrolment rate is 
23.5 per cent while the national average is 44.5 per 
cent. These social and economic disparities within the 
population have deepened perceptions of 
marginalization and exclusion. While the refugee hosting 
regions bordering Lake Chad in Niger and Chad have 
been less marginalized and less excluded from 
development planning compared to equivalent regions 
in Cameroon and Nigeria, development indicators 
remain worse than the national averages and access to 
basic services there is limited or non-existent. 
The refugee-hosting areas do not have adequate 
capacity in terms of livelihoods and social and basic 
services, which in turn has an environmental and 
economic impact. Furthermore, administrative 
Regional Overview - NIGERIA RRRP

8 R E G I O N A L R R P > 2 0 1 9 / 2 0 2 0 
population figures and corresponding national budget 
allocations do not reflect the demographic changes 
caused by refugee influxes. As the crisis becomes more 
protracted, there are increased tensions between 
refugees and host communities. Therefore, it becomes 
more difficult for new refugees, such as in Cameroon, to 
find a place to settle with host families outside the camp. 
The lack of adoption of a refugee-related law and the 
weakness of local protection services, including support 
to people with specific needs (PSN) and survivors of 
sexual and gender-based violence (SGBV), remain a 
major challenge for the improvement of the protection 
environment for refugees in the concerned countries. 
Legal barriers sometimes also prevent refugees from 
pursuing livelihoods activities, such as in Chad where 
the absence of a specific law remains the major 
challenge for refugee access to employment. National 
basic services such as health and education still remain 
insufficient, inadequate, and often inaccessible for 
refugees, especially for those living outside of camps. 
Development interventions to strengthen the resilience 
of refugees and host communities need to be scaled up 
alongside life-saving humanitarian assistance and 
protection. Therefore, in all three countries, new 
initiatives are underway to improve and strengthen 
collaboration between humanitarian and development 
actors. For instance, the application of the 
Comprehensive Refugee Response Framework (CRRF) 
by the Chadian government initiated in September 2018 
will promote development initiatives for refugee-hosting 
areas, and the inclusion of refugees in existing national 
services and social structures. Education facilities built in 
refugee camps were officially integrated into the 
Chadian national education system, and RRP partners 
advocate for the same inclusion of health facilities. In 
Niger, humanitarian and development actors such as the 
World Bank will collaborate on the refugee response, 
while refugees and host communities will be included in 
national development plans such as the Crisis Recovery 
Plan for Diffa that was introduced by the National High 
Authority for the Consolidation of Peace. In Cameroon, 
UNHCR and partners developed a joint multi-year-multipartner 
strategy (MYMPs) as well as operational projects 
for the Far North region to support the resilience of 
refugees, local authorities, and the host community. 
Within the framework of the Regional RRP, UNHCR and 
UNDP have begun to work closely together to ensure 
that development interventions that build the resilience 
of host communities and refugees are mainstreamed 
into the response plan and its implementation. 
Therefore, both agencies jointly developed the regional 
strategy, and consulted respectively with all RRP 
partners at regional, national and field levels. 
The High-Level Conference on the Lake Chad Region 
hosted by Germany, Nigeria, Norway and the UN on 
3-4 September 2018 in Berlin, Germany brought 
together a variety of stakeholders working on 
humanitarian assistance, crisis prevention, stabilization, 
and development to identify shared challenges and 
opportunities. Donors made pledges to address 
humanitarian needs and to build the resilience of over 
17 million people affected by the crisis. It is hoped that 
the international community will continue to support and 
fund the collective outcomes of this Regional RRP. 
Regional Overview - NIGERIA RRRP

UNHCR / Louise Donovan

10 R E G I O N A L R R P > 2 0 1 9 / 2 0 2 0 
Identified Needs & Regional Response Strategy 
The 2019/20 Regional Response Strategy, as outlined 
below, will guide the refugee response in Cameroon, 
Chad and Niger. While continuing to support protection 
and humanitarian assistance, Regional RRP partners in 
all three countries will focus on solutions and increasing 
development initiatives for refugees and host 
communities through a resilience-building development 
approach. The latter focuses on the capacities of 
refugees and host communities, and on the national and 
local institutions supporting them, to anticipate, prevent, 
absorb and recover from crises, while continuing to 
function and adapt in a way that supports longer-term 
prospects for sustainable development, peace and 
security, and the attainment of human rights. 
This is in line with the CRRF approach which specifies 
key elements for a comprehensive response to any 
large movement of refugees. These include rapid and 
well-supported reception and admissions; support for 
immediate and on-going needs; assistance for local and 
national institutions and communities receiving refugees; 
and expanded opportunities for solutions. It is also in 
line with the 2030 Sustainable Development Agenda, 
the UNSG’s Prevention and Sustaining Peace Agenda 
and UN Resilience Guidance. 
For each sector below, the strategy is to build on the 
comparative advantage of Regional RRP partners to plan 
for and implement a combination of humanitarian and 
development interventions towards collective outcomes 
that empower refugees, host communities and 
Governments to better cope with and recover from 
impacts of refugee influxes, strengthen their resilience 
and harness their capacities towards achieving 
sustainable development. 
Although Chad is so far the only country within the 
Nigeria/Lake Chad Basin situation to have initiated the 
application of the CRRF, the 2019/20 Nigeria response 
plan is guided by the objectives of the CRRF approach, 
such as access to territory and protection, response to 
the immediate and ongoing needs of refugees and host 
communities, assistance for local and national 
institutions as well as communities receiving refugees, 
and building partnerships for inclusion and solutions. 
THE GLOBAL COMPACT ON REFUGEES AND THE APPLICATION OF COMPREHENSIVE RESPONSES 
In 2016, all 193 Member States of the United Nations adopted the New York Declaration for Refugees and Migrants, and 
the Comprehensive Refugee Response Framework (CRRF) as part of it, to strengthen international responsibility sharing 
in situations of large movements of refugees and protracted refugee situations. The New York Declaration set in motion 
preparations for the Global Compact on Refugees (GCR), informed by the practical application of comprehensive responses 
and a broad range of consultations. The GCR was agreed on by the General Assembly on 17 December 2018. 
With the CRRF as an integral part, the global compact on refugees proposes a range of global and context-specific measures 
for applying comprehensive responses in a more systematic and sustainable ways, as outlined in its programme of 
action. 
The objectives of the Global Compact on Refugees are to: 
(i) ease pressures on host countries; (ii) enhance refugee self-reliance; (iii) expand access to third country solutions; and (iv) 
support conditions in countries of origin for return in safety and dignity. 
Regional and country-based refugee response plans contribute to the implementation of the global compact on refugees 
by articulating prioritized multi-stakeholder responses for the benefit of refugees and host communities, as identified with 
governments and partners. Among countries affected by the Nigeria situation, Chad is already applying the CRRF, as of 
end-2018, while the strategy outlined in this Regional RRP reinforces the implementation of further responses in line with 
the Global Compact on Refugees throughout all countries of its coverage in 2019. 
Regional Overview - NIGERIA RRRP

R E G I O N A L R R P > 2 0 1 9 / 2 0 2 0 11 
Protection 
Partners in the Regional RRP will continue to support the Governments of Nigeria, Cameroon, Chad and Niger to 
enhance the protection and solutions environment for populations affected by the crisis, in line with the Abuja Action 
Statement, the revised Regional Protection Strategic Framework for the Lake Chad Basin and the Strategy on 
protection, return and recovery for North-East Nigeria. 
ACCESS TO ASYLUM AND PROTECTION 
To ensure access to asylum and protection, Regional RRP actors will continue to support Governments in 
strengthening and establishing appropriate mechanisms and preventive measures that enable States to identify 
persons entering their territory in a manner that responds to protection as well as security concerns, in accordance 
with their obligations under international law. This includes border and protection monitoring and protection data 
analysis, the establishment of transit centres, joint screening processes for new arrivals, pre-registration, as well as 
other measures, conducted in an age- and gender-sensitive manner. 
In Niger, community-based early warning systems will be established with committees collecting real-time 
information on population movements at borders. Partners will promote the increased presence of national bodies 
responsible for asylum-seekers and refugees as well as protection actors in border areas, to the extent possible, to 
provide dignified treatment to persons in need of international protection with full respect for their human rights. 
Advocacy and capacity building, including training, will be enhanced for all relevant stakeholders such as border 
officials, joint protection committees, national authorities and other government representatives on key international 
protection and human rights standards, including on the principle of non-refoulement, and the safeguards of refugee 
protection. Partners will also continue to advocate for and support national legal frameworks, for example the 
adoption of refugee law, and support national institutions and structures for refugee protection and assistance and 
for their host communities in the context of socio-economic inclusion and community based approaches in out-ofcamp 
settings where possible. Collaboration with communities, government actors and development partners will be 
further strengthened to contribute to an enhanced protection environment. 
CIVIL REGISTRATION AND DOCUMENTATION FOR REFUGEES 
Registration and documentation make up the foundation to ensure protection, freedom of movement and assistance 
to refugees and support their access to basic services. Therefore, Regional RRP partners will continue to support 
relevant government authorities to ensure all refugees are biometrically registered and verified, and that appropriate 
documentation in accordance with the 1951 Convention is provided. Registration of all refugees living in host 
communities will continue as hosting areas become more accessible to humanitarian actors and security conditions 
improve. Capacity building for government actors in this regard will be provided and a strategic transfer and 
strengthening of expertise and capacities in registration and refugee status determination will be implemented in 
accordance with the Multi-year-multi-partner strategies (MYMPs). With a view to reducing the risk of statelessness 
Regional Overview - NIGERIA RRRP

12 R E G I O N A L R R P > 2 0 1 9 / 2 0 2 0 
and other protection risks associated with lack of civil documentation, partners will continue to work closely with the 
relevant government authorities to enhance access to civil registration and documentation by refugees and other 
affected populations, including birth, marriage and death certificates. 
This will include initiatives to simplify birth registration and civil documentation procedures, address administrative 
hurdles and increase capacity. Mobile registration centres will be organized and equipped, new registration centres 
created (especially in remote areas), and birth registration integrated into other sectors such as education and 
health. Efforts will also be made to reduce the cost of birth registration and documentation. Awareness-raising 
campaigns will be conducted among the affected populations on the importance of civil registration and the risks of 
statelessness. Partners in the Regional RRP will also support governments in ensuring national laws and policies are 
in accordance with international and regional standards, for example as defined in the 1954 and 1961 Statelessness 
Conventions, and the African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the Child, as well as supporting the adoption of 
the draft Protocol to the African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights on the specific aspects of the right to a 
nationality and the eradication of statelessness in Africa. Refugees will be provided with identity documents, which 
will facilitate their freedom of movement. The latter, along with access to land, is key to building the socio-economic 
inclusion of refugees and enhancing their access to economic opportunities as well as durable solutions. UNHCR will 
also support states to deliver machine readable Convention Travel Documents to refugees and to stateless persons. 
PROTECTION 
Access to asylum and protection is enhanced 
2,300 representatives of Government authorities, international organizations and civil society 
trained on refugee protection 
Refugees are registered and receive appropriate documentation, and access to civil registration 
and documentation is enhanced 
100% of refugees registered on an individual basis and received appropriate documentation 
The civilian and humanitarian character of refugee hosting areas is maintained and 
humanitarian access as well as civil-military coordination are strengthened 
1,500 of military and security force elements trained on protection, human rights and humanitarian 
principles 
Persons with specific needs are safe and receive appropriate preventive, responsive and 
restorative services 
78 of community groups operational for SGBV prevention and response 
Refugees are assisted through a comprehensive solutions approach 
59 of communal disputes resolved through local social cohesion mechanism to promote peaceful 
coexistence with local communities 
Regional Objectives & Indicators Resilience 
Regional Overview - NIGERIA RRRP

R E G I O N A L R R P > 2 0 1 9 / 2 0 2 0 13 
MAINTENANCE OF THE CIVILIAN AND HUMANITARIAN CHARACTER OF REFUGEE HOSTING AREAS 
HUMANITARIAN ACCESS AND CIVIL-MILITARY COORDINATION 
Regional RRP partners will continue to work with governments to maintain the civilian and humanitarian character of 
refugee hosting areas, to support humanitarian access as well as civil-military coordination. This includes 
collaboration on enhanced screening and other security measures in compliance with international standards. 
Capacity building will be conducted for security forces, such as police and camp-based security personnel, including 
female staff, on key international protection, refugee, humanitarian and human rights standards to maintain the 
civilian and humanitarian character of displacement sites. This will include SGBV prevention and the prevention of 
child protection risks such as forced recruitment. Awareness-raising will also be conducted with refugees and other 
affected populations on their obligations and the importance of maintaining the civilian character of refugee and IDP 
hosting areas. Civil-military coordination mechanisms will be strengthened to ensure an appropriate distinction 
between the roles of humanitarian actors and security forces as well as to enable humanitarian actors to access 
people in need of assistance in hard to reach areas. Regional RRP partners will also continue to promote and 
advocate for the identification and separation of armed elements in accordance with international standards. Mine 
risk education will be promoted for affected populations. 
SUPPORT FOR PERSONS WITH SPECIFIC NEEDS 
Persons with specific protection risks need to be safe and receive appropriate preventive, responsive and 
restorative services. Therefore, partners will ensure that persons of concern enjoy their rights, taking into account 
age, gender and diversity, and the ability to participate fully in the decisions that affect their lives and the lives of their 
family members and communities. The identification, documentation and monitoring of persons with specific needs, 
such as youth, women and children at risk, persons with disabilities, and the elderly, will continue to be strengthened 
through multi-sectoral needs assessments, collaboration with community-based networks and improved registration 
and profiling, ensuring that data of persons of concern is 
protected. Regional RRP partners will also continue to 
ensure a coordinated response to persons with specific 
needs, including through multi-sectoral referrals and 
response, enhanced community-based protection 
mechanisms, and access to psychosocial support. 
Particular attention will be paid to strengthening the 
identification and response to refugees living in host 
communities and remote or newly accessible areas. 
Child protection will be enhanced through strengthened 
measures to prevent and respond to violence, abuse 
and exploitation of children, including child labour, 
forced recruitment and early marriage. Regional RRP 
partners will ensure that children have access to the 
protection services and support they need such as 
UNHCR / Louise Donovan 
Regional Overview - NIGERIA RRRP

14 R E G I O N A L R R P > 2 0 1 9 / 2 0 2 0 
psychosocial services. The identification of and response to children at risk, including by communities, will be 
strengthened through improved Best Interest Assessment and Determination processes. Separated or 
unaccompanied minors will continue to be reunified with their families, via cross-border searches where appropriate, 
and temporarily provided with foster families or other alternative care where required. 
SGBV prevention and response will be strengthened, including identification, multi-sectoral referrals and assistance 
(e.g. medical, psychosocial and legal support for access to justice) and community-based protection mechanisms. 
Regional RRP partners will ensure that SGBV is mainstreamed in all aspects of the humanitarian response, and focus 
will continue to be placed on awareness-raising and capacity building of all relevant stakeholders, including national 
and local authorities, security forces, displaced and host communities. Community groups will be operational for 
SGBV prevention and response. Partners will particularly target public areas, including health centres for SGBV 
prevention and response interventions. Special attention will be given to population groups at risk of SGBV and to 
adolescents of reproductive age. SGBV survivors will be offered livelihoods opportunities, access to education, and 
professional training to facilitate their reintegration. 
COMPREHENSIVE SOLUTIONS FOR REFUGEES 
Regional RRP partners will continue to support processes aimed at achieving all durable solutions for refugees - 
voluntary repatriation, local integration and resettlement. They will support governments in ensuring that refugee 
returns are voluntary, safe and carried out in conditions of dignity, based on well-informed decisions, once conditions 
are conducive, and that facilitated returns of refugees are within the framework of tripartite agreements and respect 
the principle of non-refoulement. Monitoring of the voluntariness of return movements will continue, as well as 
support for the reintegration of returnees, including providing them with return packages. 
At the same time, partners will enhance the self-reliance and resilience of refugees in the asylum countries with a 
view to enabling long-term solutions. This includes improving sustainable livelihood opportunities for refugees and 
host communities as well as the integration of refugees into local and national services. Moreover, it includes 
promoting peaceful coexistence with host communities through a community-based approach, including resolving 
communal disputes through a local cohesion mechanism, and addressing the needs of host-communities in 
assistance and response. Governments will be supported in developing comprehensive durable solutions plans for 
refugees, with the involvement of refugees. Strengthening the technical and operational capacities of the 
government structures will be the priority. 
Partners will support Nigerian refugees through the provision of refugee identity cards, which will enhance their 
access to services and the possibility of obtaining bank credits that might help their resilience. Collaboration and 
coordination between humanitarian and development partners will be further strengthened, as will joint and 
coordinated planning to ensure refugees are included in national development planning, programmes and 
processes. Resettlement will be used as a protection tool and UNHCR and its partners will continue to proactively 
identify refugee cases in need of urgent resettlement. 
Regional Overview - NIGERIA RRRP

UNHCR / Xavier Bourgois

16 R E G I O N A L R R P > 2 0 1 9 / 2 0 2 0 
Access to Basic and Social Services 
EDUCATION 
Access to primary and secondary education will be a priority in 2019/20. Therefore, partners in the Regional RRP will 
continue to construct and rehabilitate schools and respective infrastructures, provide school equipment and 
supplies, and ensure recruitment and capacity building for teachers and other staffing for education. Some of the 
main challenges in the education sector include the lack of teachers, non-enrollment of girls or interruption of 
schooling due to early pregnancy, child labour or unwillingness of parents to expose their children to western 
education. Therefore, partners will mobilize communities through awareness raising campaigns on the importance of 
formal education for children, to address absenteeism and to improve the retention rate, especially for girls and 
children with specific needs. Furthermore, they will involve communities in the management of education facilities 
and in some areas offer livelihoods opportunities to Parent Teacher Associations to support the financial autonomy 
of schools. Regional RRP partners will also set up and maintain pre-school activities, as well as vocational and literacy 
opportunities and advocate for refugee students to get scholarships for attending university. 
In 2019/20 Regional RRP partners will continue to work closely with government actors at both the national and local 
levels. This includes supporting the inclusion of schools and other education facilities in and out of refugee camps, 
into the national education system. 
FOOD SECURITY 
Partners in the Regional RRP will continue to provide food rations for refugees, especially for newly arrived and 
highly vulnerable refugees and vulnerable host community members. Cash-based interventions (CBI) will be 
gradually implemented. At the same time, in collaboration with development actors they will aim to address food 
insecurity and help refugees to become self-reliant by increasing the support for income-generating activities (IGAs), 
especially for women’s groups. This includes capacity building and provision of tools and seeds for agro-pastoral 
production in communities, projects for the creation of productive assets and support for access of refugees to 
markets. In close collaboration with government authorities, partners will also explore animal health care and 
technical training on livestock breeding. 
HEALTH & NUTRITION 
In 2019, partners in the health and nutrition sector will focus on providing refugees and host communities access to 
primary and secondary health care and to reproductive health care. They will ensure support for HIV/AIDS infected 
persons, and focus on prevention and response of acute malnutrition, particularly in children. As for health 
infrastructure, Regional RRP partners will construct and rehabilitate health centers, and equip them with essential 
drugs. Community-based family planning, support for maternal and reproductive health, mental health services, 
voluntary testing, support to prevent mother-to-child HIV transmission, deworming of children, epidemiological 
surveillance and vaccinations will be carried out as well. Furthermore, partners will advocate for increasing the 
number of health personnel and providing capacity building training. In terms of nutrition, the sector will support the 
Regional Overview - NIGERIA RRRP

R E G I O N A L R R P > 2 0 1 9 / 2 0 2 0 17 
treatment of acute malnutrition through the establishment and maintenance of Infant and Young-Child Feeding (IYCF) 
spaces and activities of prevention, screening and management of malnutrition cases in communities. Moreover, 
partners will address root causes of malnutrition such as limited access to land and potable water, lack of diversified 
dietary habits and non-exclusive breastfeeding of infants. As a way to sensitize communities in this regard, partners 
plan to support livelihoods activities, conduct awareness raising on health- and WASH-related issues and promote 
the empowerment of women. The latter will be implemented in close collaboration with other sectors. 
Regional RRP partners will strengthen health services in close collaboration with the government authorities to 
gradually transfer services provided in refugee hosting areas to the national health system. The inclusion of refugees 
in national health programs and policies will also be facilitated. This includes the identification of needs, evaluation, 
planning, maintenance of referral mechanisms of medical cases from primary health care to secondary care and 
other interventions in the health and nutrition sector. Local communities will be closely involved as well. Partners will 
also explore the possibility of the gradual implementation of a health-cost-reimbursement system for refugees where 
feasible. 
Regional Objectives & Indicators 
EDUCATION 
Population has optimal access to education 
1,072 teachers trained for capacity strengthening 
FOOD SECURITY 
Population’s food security strengthened 
3,490 persons met consumption needs through seeds and agricultural tools received 
HEALTH & 
NUTRITION 
Health status of the population improved 
284 local health workers trained 
Prevention of and response to malnutrition strenghtened 
8,319 children screened, identified, and admitted to MAM and SAM treatments 
SHELTER & NFIS 
Shelter and infrastructures established, improved and maintained 
1,733 persons trained and equipped for shelter construction 
Population has sufficient basic items 
19,097 dignitary kits provided 
WASH 
Supply of potable water increased or maintained 
116 boreholes rehabilitated and/or constructed 
Resilience 
Regional Overview - NIGERIA RRRP

18 R E G I O N A L R R P > 2 0 1 9 / 2 0 2 0 
SHELTER & NON-FOOD ITEMS (NFIS) 
While Regional RRP partners will have to continue to provide newly arriving refugees from Nigeria with emergency 
shelters, they will focus in 2019 on replacing existing emergency shelters with transitional and semi-permanent 
shelters. To do so, they will provide most refugee households with training, technical assistance, tools and material or 
cash assistance for the purchase of the required materials. The training will take into consideration local design that 
minimizes the need for wood which mitigates environmental damage. However, persons with specific needs, who 
are not able to build their own shelters, will receive assistance for the construction of their homes, which includes 
community support. Partners will also ensure the construction, rehabilitation and maintenance of community shelters 
and infrastructure, including in host villages, with the engagement of communities as a means to contribute to 
peaceful co-existence. Furthermore, partners will work with governments and local authorities and in line with 
national development plans on land allocation for the construction of permanent shelters for refugees. In some 
countries, they will also construct and rehabilitate roads in refugee camps, to facilitate movement of goods and 
people. 
Regional RRP partners will continue to provide NFIs and hygiene kits to newly arrived refugees and also provide 
CBIs to those who need to replace used non-food-items. 
WATER, SANITATION & HYGIENE (WASH) 
In 2019/20, Regional RRP partners will continue to maintain and rehabilitate existing water and sanitation 
infrastructure. They will also extend existing water supply connection networks, including by the construction of 
boreholes and fountains for water supply in camps and refugee hosting villages. In addition, they will ensure the 
collection and storage of water, through the distribution of water storage kits, rehabilitation of emergency facilities 
such as tanks and the establishment of more sustainable structures. 
In line with the Community-Led Total Sanitation approach, sector partners will construct additional latrines and 
showers in community buildings such as schools, health centers and markets as well as for families at household 
level with strong participation of refugees and host communities. 
In so far as hygiene promotion is concerned, the emphasis will be on awareness-raising campaigns by trained 
hygiene promoters, including on essential family practices, to prevent epidemics. Communities will also be trained 
on how to empty latrines. 
Solid municipal waste management - from waste collection to treatment and valorization - will be enhanced with 
communities’ involvement and the use of collection kids. Where possible, waste will be processed into energy and 
fertilizer. In addition, partners will continue to provide rubbish bins and pits for the discharge of household waste. 
Regional RRP partners also plan to gradually implement cost-recovery systems. They will strengthen WASH 
management committees and support collection agents recognized by the municipalities with collection kits. While 
partnerships with state services will be further strengthened, municipalities will gradually take over the management 
and implementation of interventions in the WASH sector. 
Regional Overview - NIGERIA RRRP

R E G I O N A L R R P > 2 0 1 9 / 2 0 2 0 19 
Self-reliance and Environmental Protection 
LIVELIHOODS 
In 2019, partners in the Regional RRP will continue to provide refugees and host communities with assistance for 
livelihoods activities, notably through the provision of tools and capacity building. For example, mixed groups of 
refugees and their hosts will be trained and provided with kits for agriculture, or with training and support for cattle 
breeding, fishery, peanut processing, or commercial activities. Vocational training will also be provided inter alia for 
sewing and carpentry. Youth will be especially targeted for vocational training. In addition, partners will continue to 
advocate for access to agricultural and arable land with administrative authorities and traditional leadership for the 
development of community agricultural fields and for grazing areas. Moreover, entrepreneurship will be promoted 
through training on self-employment, creation of business associations, and the development of partnerships with 
microfinance institutions to support saving and access to microcredits. Furthermore, Regional RRP partners will 
advocate with authorities for refugee access to markets. The modality of cash will be increasingly used for livelihood 
support for refugees and host communities to reduce tension while promoting peaceful coexistence. 
In addition, partners will place a special focus on improving refugee access to national and local development plans 
through close collaboration with development partners. Such collaboration might include building irrigation and 
water systems to support agricultural and livestock needs, the expansion of veterinary services and strengthening of 
vocational training capacities. 
ENVIRONMENT 
To mitigate the environmental impact of refugees, sector partners will continue to support community-based 
mechanisms to promote agroforestry and reforestation, including tree seedling production and planting as well as 
dune stabilization. Wherever possible, interventions such as food for work and money transfer will be intensified in 
2019 to provide an income to refugees participating in environmental protection programmes. Village committees 
and environmental clubs, with the support of government authorities, will be engaged in awareness raising on 
environmental issues. Regional RRP partners will further support the use of alternative sources of energy such as 
energy efficient cooking stoves instead of firewood. To achieve this objective, energy saving stoves will be locally 
produced and distributed. Trainings and awareness-raising campaigns on the rational use and energy-saving 
practices for refugees and host populations will be conducted. 
LIVELIHOODS 
Self-reliance and livelihoods improved 
24,622 persons met part of households needs through production kits for agricultural/fishery/ 
livestock activities 
ENVIRONMENT 
Natural resources and shared environment better protected 
306,500 tree seedlings planted to mitigate deforestation 
Regional Objectives & Indicators Resilience 
Regional Overview - NIGERIA RRRP

Regional coordination 
The UNHCR Regional Refugee Coordinator for the 
Nigeria situation, together with the Representatives in 
Cameroon, Chad and Niger, will continue to assist the 
respective governments in leading and coordinating the 
inter-agency response to Nigerian refugees by UN 
agencies and NGOs. This will ensure that the different 
coordination mechanisms in place in each country will 
be considered, while the accountability of the respective 
Government and UNHCR will be respected. 
In Cameroon, refugee coordination structures are in 
place, with working groups for the different sectors such 
as protection, shelter and NFI, while the inter-sector 
response is coordinated in monthly meetings chaired by 
UNHCR at field and national level. Coordination and 
collaboration with the Government is ensured through 
liaison with the Governor’s office as well as with 
Regional Delegates of the respective ministries. In 
partnership with UNDP, more resilience programmes will 
be developed and integrated in the refugee response. 
In Chad, both the Government and UNHCR coordinate 
the inter-agency refugee response at field and national 
level. This coordination is now guided by the formal 
adoption of the Comprehensive Refugee Response 
Framework (CRRF) by the Chadian Government on 
3 May 2018. The current application of comprehensive 
responses, as an inclusive whole of society approach, 
will result in the coordination of a larger variety of 
stakeholders to help Chad cope with the impact of 
hosting refugees and strengthen resilience as well as to 
engage in development programs under the overall 
guidance of the government and in line with already 
existing national plans. In this context the Government of 
Chad will work in close collaboration with and be 
supported by UN agencies, NGOs, the World Bank 
through IDA 18, development actors, donors and the 
private sector. Regional RRP partners are also engaging 
key players in the private sector and in leading 
technology companies, to support learning, livelihood 
and microfinance opportunities for refugees and host 
communities. 
In Niger, the Governor of Diffa and regional sectorial 
working groups, led by technical directorates, 
coordinate the response at field level. UNHCR and 
OCHA together lead an inter-organization coordination 
committee that ensures the link between Government 
actors and humanitarian agencies. UNHCR uses the 
coordination platform of clusters and sector working 
groups in line with the OCHA-UNHCR Note on 
Coordination in Mixed Situations, while remaining 
accountable for the refugee response in all sectors. 
Regional Overview - NIGERIA RRRP

REGIONAL RRP PARTNERS 
•• ABIOGET 
•• ACF 
•• ACTED 
•• AIDER 
•• CARE 
•• CONCERN 
•• COOPI 
•• COPRESSA 
•• CROIX ROUGE 
LUXEMBOURGEOISE 
•• DIKO 
•• DRC 
•• FAO 
•• HIAS 
•• IEDA 
•• IMC 
•• INTERSOS 
•• IOM 
•• IRC 
•• IUCN 
•• LWF 
•• NRC 
•• OXFAM 
•• PLAN INTERNATIONAL 
•• PUBLIC CONCERN 
•• SAHELI 
•• SAVE THE CHILDREN 
•• SDO 
•• SFCG 
•• Solidarité International 
•• SOS VILLAGE D’ENFANTS 
•• UN Women 
•• UNDP 
•• UNFPA 
•• UNHCR 
•• UNICEF 
•• WESDE 
•• WFP 
•• WHH 
•• WHO 
•• WORLD VISION 
UNHCR / Louise Donovan

22 R E G I O N A L R R P > 2 0 1 9 / 2 0 2 0 
Financial Requirements 
By Organization & Country 
ORGANIZATION CAMEROON CHAD NIGER TOTAL ESTIMATE 2020 
ABIOGET 1,589,091 1,589,091 1,750,000 
ACF 563,918 563,918 563,918 
ACTED 1,100,000 1,100,000 1,100,000 
AIDER 535,000 535,000 550,000 
CARE International 651,219 651,219 651,219 
Concern 962,199 962,199 962,199 
COOPI 500,272 500,272 500,272 
COOPRESA 18,671 18,671 19,000 
DRC 126,000 126,000 126,000 
DIKO Niger 531,637 531,637 531,637 
FAO 3,200,000 500,000 3,700,000 3,500,000 
HIAS 1,295,511 1,295,511 1,200,000 
IEDA 1,550,446 1,550,446 1,650,000 
IMC 4,700,000 400,000 5,100,000 5,500,000 
IOM 2,292,500 2,292,500 2,292,500 
IRC 315,283 530,108 2,632,126 3,477,517 3,705,050 
IUCN 1,300,000 1,300,000 1,400,000 
INTERSOS 800,000 800,000 850,000 
LWF 2,320,416 2,320,416 2,400,000 
Luxembourg Red Cross 620,988 620,988 620,988 
NRC 1,355,240 1,355,240 1,450,000 
Oxfam 530,229 530,229 530,229 
Plan International 1,897,237 984,799 2,882,036 2,537,994 
Public Concern 500,000 500,000 500,000 
Saheli 100,000 100,000 100,000 
Save the Children International 887,828 887,828 887,828 
SDO Niger 400,000 400,000 400,000 
Search for Common Ground 3,300,000 3,300,000 3,300,000 
Solidarités International 415,000 415,000 430,000 
SOS Children's Villages 157,417 157,417 157,417 
UNDP 1,000,000 1,250,000 1,650,000 3,900,000 4,150,000 
UNHCR 22,359,761 5,181,844 20,806,448 48,348,053 51,151,810 
Financial Requirements - NIGERIA RRRP

R E G I O N A L R R P > 2 0 1 9 / 2 0 2 0 23 
ORGANIZATION CAMEROON CHAD NIGER TOTAL ESTIMATE 2020 
UNHCR (Regional) 245,362 
UNICEF 1,100,000 5,683,680 6,783,680 6,883,680 
UNFPA 450,000 600,000 1,240,060 2,290,060 2,697,231 
UNWOMEN 750,000 750,000 800,000 
Welthungerhilfe 60,900 60,900 60,900 
WESDE Cameroon 722,710 722,710 180,000 
WFP 18,130,614 2,125,799 10,318,146 30,574,559 29,992,621 
WHO 830,000 830,000 830,000 
World Vision International 1,276,696 1,276,696 1,276,696 
GRAND TOTAL 65,109,468 10,983,262 59,007,061 135,345,154 138,189,188 
By Sector & Country 
SECTOR CAMEROON CHAD NIGER TOTAL ESTIMATE 2020 
Protection 12,071,936 2,444,833 11,221,786 25,738,555 
Education 4,866,101 699,232 3,028,059 8,593,392 
Food Security 20,682,668 2,168,737 11,830,385 34,681,789 
Health & Nutrition 5,874,479 1,913,436 3,735,918 11,523,833 
Livelihoods & Environment 11,627,756 2,126,060 9,026,052 22,779,867 
Shelter & NFIs 5,157,728 763,983 12,774,336 18,696,048 
WASH 4,828,801 866,981 7,390,525 13,086,307 
GRAND TOTAL 65,109,468 10,983,262 59,007,061 135,345,154 * 138,189,188 
*This includes regional funding requirements of 245,362 USD. 
Financial Requirements - NIGERIA RRRP

UNHCR / Xavier Bourgois

CAMEROON 
REFUGEE RESPONSE PLAN

N I G E R I A 
N I G E R 
C H A D 
C A M E R O O N 
Minawao 
Refugee locations 
Refugee camp 
Refugee crossing 
20.7 
12.1 
11.6 
5.9 
5.2 
4.9 
WASH 4.8 
Education 
Shelter 
& NFIs 
Health & 
Nutrition 
Livelihoods & 
Environment 
Protection 
Food security 
Requirements | in millions US$ 
2019 PLANNED RESPONSE 
99,500 
REFUGEE 
POPULATION 
20,000 
HOST POPULATION 
TARGETED 
US$ 65.1M 
REQUIREMENTS 
22 
PARTNERS 
INVOLVED

R R P > 2 0 1 9 / 2 0 2 0 27 
Country Overview 
Introduction 
In 2018, frequent attacks by Boko Haram and military 
operations by joint Cameroonian and Nigerian forces 
continued to have a negative impact on civilians and 
administrative structures, especially in border areas. Due 
to insecurity, most of the official border crossing points 
remained closed for long periods and state officials in 
charge of managing cross-border movements were 
absent. There has also been a very high turn-over of 
border guards assigned to the conflict-zones. As border 
guards and vigilance committees have limited 
knowledge of the rights of refugees, RRP partners still 
witnessed high numbers of cases of refoulement of 
refugees, and also serious violations of human rights of 
the local population. Still, the establishment of an early 
warning system has enabled protection partners to 
continually monitor the situation of out-of-camp 
refugees, even in previously inaccessible areas. 
Furthermore, the consolidation of the Joint Protection 
Committees in the most affected departments allowed 
local authorities to better understand the protection and 
assistance needs of refugees and other persons of 
concern. 
The security situation across Cameroon in 2018 
remained volatile, marked by the Boko Haram crisis in 
the Far North and the rising secessionist movement in 
the English-speaking South-West and North-West 
regions claiming independence. President Biya, in power 
since 1982, was re-elected in October 2018 for another 
seven-year mandate. Opposition and civil society 
leaders have contested the election’s results. 
Despite Cameroon’s strong performance within the 
Economic and Monetary Community of Central Africa 
(CEMAC), poverty and inequality remain high. In 2014, 
poverty was estimated to affect over 30 per cent of 
Cameroonians out of which 90 per cent lived below the 
poverty line in rural areas. In refugee hosting districts, 
poverty levels are among the highest, with 74 per cent 
of the population in the Far North living below the 
poverty line. 
The Cameroon ‘Vision 2035’ calls for “an emerging 
nation, democratic and united in its diversity” with a 
2010-2020 strategy for growth and employment that 
prioritizes mass creation of decent jobs; increased 
availability of high-quality social services; reduced 
inequality through shared benefits of growth; increased 
solidarity, and protection of the vulnerable. 
Finally, the generosity and continuous positive attitude 
of host communities towards refugees, and their 
willingness to continue welcoming newly-arrived asylumseekers, 
will hopefully pave the way in 2019 for all 
stakeholders to smoothly implement planned activities 
and build on achievements made. 
Country Overview - CAMEROON

28 R R P > 2 0 1 9 / 2 0 2 0 
Overall Needs and Strategic Response 
In January 2018, the refugee population in Minawao 
refugee camp, where most of the Nigeria refugees in 
Cameroon live, stood at nearly 60,500 individuals. After 
the completion of the biometric verification and 
registration exercises in February 2018, taking into 
account departures, the files of deceased refugees and 
unaccounted individuals were closed, decreasing the 
overall camp population. However, as a consequence of 
the volatile security situation, some 13,000 individuals, 
among them new arrivals from Nigeria, moved from host 
villages to the refugee camp with a monthly average of 
1,660 arrivals. This saw the number of refugees living in 
the camp increase once again to 53,000. 
It is worth noting that nearly 45,000 refugees are still 
living out-of-camp. Considering the trend of new arrivals, 
RRP partners expect the refugee population to reach 
nearly 100,000 in the course of 2019. Biometric 
exercises will have to continue in order to register 
46 per cent of the refugees, mostly in out-of-camp 
settings and the host populations’ resilience will have to 
be supported. 
In 2019/20, RRP partners will focus on those sectors with 
the greatest needs - protection and livelihoods. One of 
the key protection concerns in the Far North continues 
to be refoulement, which is often a consequence of a 
lack of proper documentation. Approximately 1,200 
individuals are reported to have been denied access to 
asylum in 2018. Access to territory remains the major 
challenge. Partners will therefore focus on ensuring 
access to asylum, continuing the biometric registration 
of refugees living in out-of-camp settings, providing 
them with humanitarian assistance, and covering the 
needs of newly arriving refugees in Minawao camp. 
Legal services and support to survivors of sexual and 
gender-based violence (SGBV) and to children who have 
suffered abuse, exploitation and neglect are insufficient, 
and rarely accessible for out-of-camp refugees. Due to 
lack of funding, services delivered to persons with 
specific needs (PSN) are limited. Assistance to children, 
youth and PSN, including survivors of SGBV, will 
therefore be among the priorities in the strategic 
response. 
The livelihoods situation in Minawao refugee camp is as 
unfavorable as the socio-economic environment outside 
the camp. In addition, the provision of basic services in 
the health, nutrition, WASH and education sectors still 
remains a challenge. Regarding access to reproductive 
health services for example, the crude mortality rate 
currently stands at 4.2. The new maternity facility in 
Minawao should be equipped according to minimum 
standards for reproductive health, while the health 
centre’s personnel should be systematically trained in 
preventing and responding to SGBV cases. Some 
services, such as referral to secondary or tertiary health 
services are extremely limited and refugees can barely 
benefit from mental health services due to funding 
constraints. The provision of water in the camp remains 
below standards, with an average of 14 litres per person 
per day and even this level may not be sustainable in 
2019 due to recurrent failures in the water network. 
Moreover, climate change is impacting the rivers which 
are increasingly drying out. 
In order to address the abovementioned prioritized 
needs, RRP actors will pursue creative outreach and 
engage in new partnerships. Interventions will be based 
on a community mobilization strategy that enhances 
community structures and sustainability, to secure more 
effective protection services, education and assistance 
to persons with specific needs and sectorial 
programming in the health, nutrition, WASH, and shelter 
sectors. 
Country Overview - CAMEROON 

R R P > 2 0 1 9 / 2 0 2 0 29 
Coordination and Partnerships 
For the Nigerian refugee response in Cameroon, each sector is led by Government entities represented in the region 
and co-led by UN agencies. There is a bi-monthly UNHCR-chaired Multi-Sector Operations Team meeting in Maroua, 
which brings together all sector-leads and co-leads as well as key humanitarian partners working in the region. 
UNHCR currently leads a multi-sectoral operations team for the refugee response as well as the national Protection 
Working Group in the capital, Yaoundé. 
In accordance with the “Joint OCHA–UNHCR Note on Mixed situations – Coordination in practice,” the responsibility 
for coordinating the overall humanitarian response for refugees and IDPs in the Far North has been delegated to 
OCHA’s Office in Maroua. The Humanitarian Coordinator remains accountable for the non-refugee-related response 
while UNHCR maintains its accountability in the refugee response. 
UNHCR entertains collaborative partnerships with UN sister agencies including UNDP, with whom a joint 
Humanitarian/Development nexus project is in its second year. Refugee coordination structures are in place 
including working groups for protection, shelter and NFI as well as camp management which are led by UNHCR. 
Monthly inter-agency coordination meetings are chaired by the government (Governor’s office) through the Divisional 
Delegate and co-chaired by UNHCR. 
The Governor’s office as well as the Regional Delegates 
of the respective ministries charged with shelter, water 
resource development, and security management 
maintain a close relationship with RRP partners. The 
field-based coordination is complemented at the 
national level by the inter-sector working group 
meetings. 
As a result of the UNHCR/World Bank partnership, 
Cameroon has been among the first countries to be 
selected to receive funds allocated from the World 
Bank’s IDA 18 sub window. Once the IDA 18 funding will 
be disbursed to the Government of Cameroon, 
development projects in refugee hosting areas can be 
strengthened. 
RRP PARTNERS 
•• ABIOGET 
•• AIDER 
•• COPRESSA 
•• FAO 
•• IEDA 
•• IMC 
•• INTERSOS 
•• IRC 
•• IUCN 
•• LWF 
•• NRC 
•• PLAN 
INTERNATIONAL 
•• PUBLIC CONCERN 
•• SAHELI 
•• Solidarité 
International 
•• UN Women 
•• UNDP 
•• UNFPA 
•• UNHCR 
•• UNICEF 
•• WESDE 
•• WFP 
Country Overview - CAMEROON

30 R R P > 2 0 1 9 / 2 0 2 0 
Planned Response 
Protection 
In 2019/20, RRP partner interventions in the Far North 
will focus on strengthening the protection environment, 
including the preservation of asylum space in Cameroon 
and the enhancement of the capacities of the joint 
protection committees, with a view to setting up a 
national framework capable of ensuring protection and 
assistance to refugees. Newly-arrived refugees will be 
registered individually and will receive appropriate 
documentation (e.g. refugee certificates), while refugees 
hosted outside Minawao camp will be registered 
biometrically in order to ensure their protection and the 
delivery of humanitarian assistance. In addition, 
prevention of SGBV, child protection and support to 
persons with specific needs will receive particular 
attention. 
In terms of durable solutions, voluntary returns in safety 
and dignity will be facilitated during 2019 through the 
framework of the Tripartite Agreements signed between 
Cameroon, Nigeria and UNHCR in March 2017, provided 
conditions in the country of origin are conducive. 
Furthermore, UNHCR and its partners will continue to 
proactively identify refugee cases in need of urgent 
resettlement. 
Refugees will be empowered in order to strengthen their 
resilience and to prepare them for eventual local 
integration. To make progress in this area, the technical 
and operational capacities of existing State structures 
will have to be enhanced. Through the provision of 
refugee identity cards, the Government will further 
empower Nigerian refugees, as the cards will facilitate 
their access to civil services, such as obtaining bank 
accounts. 
To reinforce this resilience there are already some 
measures in place, such as a law guaranteeing refugees 
access to employment, a national livelihood strategy 
applied in the refugee camp, vocational training of 
refugees, and a national social programme tailored for 
vulnerable refugees. 
POPULATION IN MINAWAO CAMP 
as of 31 October 2018 
54,659 
REGISTERED REFUGEES 
12,883 
NEWLY REGISTERED IN 2018 
Age 
0 2,000 4,000 6,000 8,000 10,000 12,000 
60+ 
18-59 
12-17 
5-11 
0-4 
Demographic representation 
Female Male 
Planned Response - CAMEROON 

R R P > 2 0 1 9 / 2 0 2 0 31 
OBJECTIVE 1: 
Access to asylum and protection is enhanced 
1,000 representatives of Government authorities, international organizations and civil society trained on refugee protection 
OBJECTIVE 2: 
Refugees are registered and receive appropriate documentation, and access to civil registration and documentation is 
enhanced 
100% of refugees registered on an individual basis and received appropriate documentation 
10,000 refugees received civil documents 
OBJECTIVE 3: 
The civilian and humanitarian character of refugee hosting area is maintained and humanitarian access as well as civilmilitary 
coordination are strengthened 
1,200 military and security forces trained on human rights and humanitarian principles 
120 military and security forces trained on prevention, identification and safe referral of SGBV cases 
OBJECTIVE 4: 
Persons with specific needs are safe and receive appropriate preventive, responsive and restorative services 
1,000 persons received legal assistance 
3,000 children at risk identified, followed up and effective response provided 
1,250 SGBV survivors received psycho-social and mental health support 
25 community groups operational for SGBV prevention and response 
OBJECTIVE 5: 
Refugees are assisted through a comprehensive solutions approach 
24 communal disputes resolved through local social cohesion mechanism to promote peaceful coexistence with local 
communities 
Resilience 
Planned Response - CAMEROON

32 R R P > 2 0 1 9 / 2 0 2 0 
Education 
Despite the efforts of the Government and humanitarian 
actors to equip new schools, there are significant 
constraints for refugees and their hosts in accessing 
quality education in a safe learning environment. Almost 
63 per cent of the entire refugee population are children 
up to 17 years of age. By the end of 2018, there were 
over 26,000 school-age children in Minawao camp, out 
of which 17,354 are attending school. Still, the number of 
adolescents who have never been to school in Nigeria is 
high. 
The situation for refugees living in host communities is 
even more challenging. Schools need to be constructed 
or rehabilitated, qualified teachers are not being 
deployed in sufficient numbers, and there is a lack of 
community participation. Furthermore, partners in the 
education sector witness a high rate of absenteeism, 
smaller numbers of refugee girls attending school, and 
little involvement of parents in pursuing education for 
their children. 
In 2019, RRP partners are planning to support the 
education of 18,900 refugee children in Minawao camp, 
6,700 refugee children outside the camp, and 7,000 
children among the host population. 
Setting up pre-school activities, strengthening primary 
education, facilitating access to secondary education, 
creating literacy opportunities for all and strengthening 
community participation will be among the main 
priorities in order to provide children with the foundation 
for a better future. As the overall quality of education 
also needs to be improved, RRP partners will ensure the 
supply of school kits and increase the deployment and 
capacity building of government contracted teachers. 
The two relevant Ministries will increase community 
involvement through awareness-raising campaigns and 
engage beneficiaries in the recycling of used materials 
to produce school benches and fences, as well as 
clothing for vulnerable children. Most importantly 
though, the Arabic language will be integrated into the 
literacy curriculum, to encourage the community to send 
children to school and render schools more welcoming 
- especially to girls who have a notoriously high dropout 
rate. 
OBJECTIVE 1: 
Population has optimal access to education 
32,300 refugee students enrolled in pre, primary or 
secondary school in and out-of-camp 
70 teachers trained for capacity strengthening 
50 primary school classrooms constructed and/or 
rehabilitated in camp and host communities 
OBJECTIVE 2: 
Girls’ education improved by reducing SGBV in schools 
15 schools with infrastructure and protection mechanisms 
that are favourable to girls in camp and host communities 
established 
Resilience 
UNHCR / Louise Donovan 
Planned Response - CAMEROON 

R R P > 2 0 1 9 / 2 0 2 0 33 
Food security 
In 2018, all refugees living in Minawao camp received 
food assistance from WFP with a daily calorific value of 
2,100 Kcal per person. In addition, nearly 3,000 newlyarrived 
asylum-seekers in Gourenguel transit centre 
received hot meals from UNHCR, with the same 
nutritional value. Due to lack of funding, some 44,830 
refugees in accessible host villages were not provided 
with food assistance. Also due to funding shortages, in 
February 2018 UNHCR was forced to temporarily halt 
the provision of hot meals to newly-arrived refugees. 
Despite the efforts made to increase livelihoods 
opportunities, the poverty rate in the Far North region 
continues to rise. The marginal rate of food insecurity in 
the Far North region remains high - 52.8 per cent (WFP/ 
GoC 2017), mainly as a consequence of Boko Haram 
raids. In some instances, fields were destroyed and 
animals stolen by the insurgents or farmers were forced 
to flee. In 2019, partners in the food security sector will 
therefore advocate for the inclusion of refugees in 
national and specific Government-led development 
programmes in the region, while unconditional food 
assistance will be gradually reduced. 
Out of all food insecure people among the local 
population, some 4.2 per cent are severely food 
insecure. The gradual phasing-out of unconditional food 
assistance will take place after socio-economic market 
studies for the implementation of cash have been 
completed. As a complementary measure, resilience 
mechanisms will be strengthened, through increasing 
the support of income-generating activities and through 
capacity building in the agro-pastoral sector. Here, 
refugees and host populations near Minawao camp will 
be trained in food hygiene and dietary diversity and the 
development of value chains in agricultural activities. 
Beneficiaries will also learn how to increase their farming 
productivity. In addition, assistance will be enhanced 
through cash transfer programmes. 
In 2019, RRP partners will seek to provide food 
assistance to 55,000 refugees in Minawao camp and 
1,000 out-of-camp. With respect to newly arrived 
refugees, 15,000 people are targeted for the provision of 
hot meals and the distribution of high energy biscuits. 
RRP partners will also target 6,848 refugees out-ofcamp, 
host community members, IDPs and returnees 
with cash grants. 
OBJECTIVE 1: 
Food security improved 
71,000 persons received food assistance 
OBJECTIVE 2: 
Food security strengthened 
1,000 persons met consumption needs through seeds and 
agricultural tools 
Resilience 
Planned Response - CAMEROON

34 R R P > 2 0 1 9 / 2 0 2 0 
Health & Nutrition 
1. Mid-Upper Arm Circumference 
Access to primary and secondary health care for 
Nigerian refugees hosted in Minawao camp and in 
out-of-camp settings remains a challenge, as health 
structures in Cameroon’s Far North are ill-equipped. The 
unmet needs remain significant in this sector despite the 
efforts made by the various actors in the health sector 
over the past years. To date, the majority of out-of-camp 
refugees are hosted in the departments of Mayo 
Tsanaga, Logone-et-Chari and Mayo Sava, where most 
of them do not benefit from free access to health care 
due to insufficient resources. 
As part of the humanitarian response for Nigerian 
refugees in 2019/20, the health and nutrition sector 
identified three main areas of intervention: access to 
primary and secondary health care, access to 
reproductive health care and HIV/AIDS prevention and 
treatment, and management of acute malnutrition 
coupled with Infant and Young-Child-Feeding (IYCF). RRP 
partners expected to operate in this sector are working 
in close collaboration with governmental authorities, 
furthermore, the planning, implementation and 
evaluation of the activities will be done with the 
involvement of beneficiaries and host communities. 
In 2019, health and nutritional support activities will focus 
on the rehabilitation of health facilities, including the 
provision of equipment and essential drugs. Family 
planning activities will be integrated through a 
community-based approach. Also, RRP partners will 
support and strengthen voluntary HIV testing and 
address mother-to-child HIV transmission. The sector 
will promote the establishment of IYCF spaces and 
organize support groups among the community. 
Prevention, screening and management of malnutrition 
cases in the community will be further enhanced. 
Screening for acute malnutrition using the MUAC1 by 
mothers or caregivers allows rapid screening of 
malnourished children at the community level. In 
addition, vegetable gardens will be promoted in order to 
help prevent malnutrition and family planning sessions 
will complement the programme. The identification of 
needs in health facilities as well as the implementation, 
monitoring and evaluation of all activities will be done in 
close collaboration with government authorities. A 
special emphasis will be placed on advocating for a 
study on health care cost recovery mechanisms 
involving government and other health sector 
stakeholders. 
OBJECTIVE 1: 
Health status improved 
171,000 new curative consultations carried out 
200 local health workers trained 
10 health facilities rehabilitated, equipped, supplied and 
locally staffed 
OBJECTIVE 2: 
Population has optimal access to reproductive health and 
HIV/AIDS services 
4,000 livebirths attended by skilled personnel 
2,100 persons newly admitted to family planning 
OBJECTIVE 3: 
Implementation of integrated management of acute 
malnutrition programmes ensured 
2,650 children screened, identified, and admitted to MAM 
and SAM treatments 
Resilience 
Planned Response - CAMEROON 

R R P > 2 0 1 9 / 2 0 2 0 35 
Livelihoods & Environment 
In 2018, as part of a refugee empowerment programme 
for persons aged 18-59, some 40 mixed groups 
consisting of refugee and host community members 
were trained and provided with 40 hectares of land for 
farming. For small livestock, 25 groups of mixed 
breeders of cattle were created. A total of 66 groups 
pursuing Income Generating Activities (IGAs) such as 
trade, processing of peanuts into oil, bakery and mills, 
have also been created. In addition, 125 beneficiaries 
received vocational training in sewing and carpentry. 
However, all the efforts already made by RRP partners 
over recent years have still been insufficient to enable 
refugees to achieve self-reliance. Though partners 
managed to raise the refugee youth employment rate to 
25 per cent within a 12-month period, it also remains low. 
Therefore, in 2019/20, in order to build resilient 
livelihoods, a special focus will be placed on improving 
the inclusion of refugees into national development 
programmes. This aims to facilitate their access to 
financial services such as establishing bank accounts or 
requesting microcredits. The sector will also strengthen 
its advocacy for refugee access to arable land and 
grazing areas. Market value chains will have to be 
developed and vocational trainings increased. 
Furthermore, cash for livelihoods will have to be 
provided in Minawao camp and in out-of-camp areas. 
RRP partners will further strengthen refugee 
empowerment and promote entrepreneurship through 
self-employment training. 
In 2018, environment sector programmes included 
reforestation and the provision of alternative sources of 
energy. Some 115,483 seedlings were planted in 
22 green spaces. Plants were distributed to refugee 
households in Minawao camp and in host villages to 
reforest some 167.2 hectares. In addition, two ecological 
briquette manufacturing centres were established to 
allow 50 women to run a microbusiness selling 
briquettes and improved cooking stoves. These 
activities are ongoing with the aim of addressing the 
serious deforestation that has occurred as a 
consequence of the establishment of Minawao camp. 
Thus, in order to meet the needs of refugees and host 
populations, efforts will focus on reinforcing the sectoral 
strategy to build the resilience capacities of local actors, 
IGAs on nursery production techniques, reforestation 
and maintenance of tree plants as well as conducting 
training sessions for refugees and host populations. 
Some 100 young individuals will be trained in tree 
nurseries for the eventual planting of 300,000 trees in 
the camp and in the host village near Minawao camp, 
covering a surface of 670 hectares. The capacities of 
local authorities in the area of environmental protection 
will also be strengthened to ensure forest preservation 
and social cohesion. 
OBJECTIVE 1: 
Self reliance and livelihoods improved 
21,022 persons met household needs through production 
kits received for agriculture/livestock/fisheries commercial 
activities 
2,294 small business associations formed/supported 
OBJECTIVE 2: 
Access to energy assured 
25,086 households had access to sustainable energy and 
were provided with energy saving equipment 
OBJECTIVE 3: 
Natural resources and shared environment better 
protected 
300,000 tree seedlings planted to mitigate deforestation 
Resilience 
Planned Response - CAMEROON

UNHCR / Xavier Bourgois

R R P > 2 0 1 9 / 2 0 2 0 37 
Shelter & NFIs 
The shelter assessment carried out in Minawao camp in 
August 2018 counted 14,027 shelters in the camp, 
including 5,278 emergency shelters and 8,749 
transitional shelters. In addition to these, the shelter and 
NFI sector estimated that 750 emergency shelters would 
be needed for new arrivals before the end of 2018. 
In 2019, the number of households who will need to 
transform their emergency shelter into a transitional 
shelter is estimated at 6,000 households (30,000 
people). Out of these, 1,200 of the most vulnerable 
households will require support in the construction of 
transitional shelters, while 4,800 will only require 
material support. RRP partners will provide all 
households with the capacity to construct their own 
transitional shelters through training, technical 
assistance and cash/voucher support for the purchase of 
materials. Training in construction techniques will enable 
refugees to adopt traditional methods of architecture, 
minimizing the use of wood which mitigates the negative 
impact on the environment. For the 8,749 remaining 
households living in transitional shelters, more than half 
will need a shelter rehabilitation kit. Furthermore, 8,100 
refugee households (or 32,400 people of concern) will 
need to renew their NFI kits. 
Approximately 10,000 new refugees are expected to 
arrive in Minawao camp in 2019. As such, the shelter and 
NFI sector will respond to the emergency shelter and 
NFI needs of 4,000 new households. This response will 
include the provision of 20 community shelters, 2,500 
family tents and 2,500 NFI kits composed of essential 
household items. 
To facilitate access and movement of people and goods 
in the camp, some 25 km of road construction is 
needed. Budgetary restrictions, however, may allow the 
construction / rehabilitation of only 8 km of roads. 
Assessments carried out by the shelter and NFI sectoral 
group in collaboration with IOM underlined the massive 
shelter and NFI needs of refugees living in out-of-camp 
settings, where 44,000 refugees urgently require 
emergency shelter and basic household items. As 
assistance to out-of-camp refugees is planned to be 
expanded in 2019, RRP partners will provide a shelter 
response through cash vouchers enabling households 
to purchase the materials they need to build their own 
shelters, adopting the host community’s traditional 
design. Community infrastructure improvements in 
villages hosting large numbers of refugees are also 
urgently required in order to support their integration 
and contribute to peaceful coexistence. 
OBJECTIVE 1: 
Shelter and infrastructure established, improved and 
maintained 
4,000 emergency shelters provided 
4,800 transitional shelters provided through cash grants/ 
vouchers 
1,000 persons trained and equipped for shelter construction 
OBJECTIVE 2: 
Population has sufficient basic domestic items 
8,100 households provided with basic domestic items 
14,000 dignitary kits provided 
Resilience 
Planned Response - CAMEROON

38 R R P > 2 0 1 9 / 2 0 2 0 
WASH 
In late August 2018, the WASH sector was able to 
provide an average of 13 litres of water per day for each 
refugee in Minawao camp, which is below standard. The 
water sources remained the same as in previous years - 
the existing boreholes inside the camp, the Mokolo 
water supply network and the Mayo-Louti pumping 
systems. Concerning hygiene and sanitation, the ratio 
remains 20 persons/latrine; 24 persons/shower; 
14 households/garbage bin; and 614 persons/hygiene 
promoter. 
In 2019, the WASH sector targets nearly 120,000 
beneficiaries including all refugees in Minawao camp 
and non-camp refugees and 20,000 surrounding host 
community members. Planning calls for the extension of 
the existing water supply network with the construction 
of at least 63 additional fountains, including 
44 boreholes in the villages neighbouring Minawao 
camp. The sector also plans to rehabilitate 154 
boreholes and to strengthen the capacities of local 
partners and management committees of water points. 
Regarding sanitation, the construction of ECOSAN 
latrines in schools, health centers and markets as well as 
the construction of latrines and emergency showers and 
over 7,000 ECOSAN family latrines for a ratio of 
15 persons/latrine are planned. 
The construction of 6,534 showers separated from 
latrines is also in the pipeline. The CBI approach to build 
latrines for the vulnerable will continue. For hygiene 
promotion, the emphasis will be on training and 
monitoring hygiene promoters and conducting mass 
information campaigns and home visits for awareness 
raising. The pilot “WaSH in School” programme initiated 
in 2018 will continue. For out-of-camp refugees and 
surrounding villages, activities will be carried out on the 
basis of community-led total sanitation, an innovative 
approach to stop open defecation practices and improve 
sanitation and hygiene practices in a community through 
long-lasting behavioural changes. 
The inclusion of refugees and host communities in all 
stages of waste management - from waste collection to 
waste evacuation and treatment is planned. A pilot 
system of waste sorting by households is already in 
place and collected waste will be used for soil 
fertilization. A team will be trained to manually empty 
latrines which will create new jobs in Minawao camp in 
addition to those existing in processing plastic waste 
and making tiles. 
OBJECTIVE 1: 
Supply of potable water increased or maintained 
20 litres of potable water available per person per day 
44 boreholes constructed 
OBJECTIVE 2: 
Population lives in satisfactory conditions of sanitation 
and hygiene 
540 emergency latrines constructed 
7,162 household sanitary latrines constructed 
278 institutional latrines constructed 
450 households converted solid waste into energy sources 
Resilience 
Planned Response - CAMEROON 

R R P > 2 0 1 9 / 2 0 2 0 39 
Financial Requirements 
By Organization & Sector 
ORGANIZATION PROT EDU 
FOOD 
SEC 
HEALTH 
& NUTR 
LIVELIHOODS 
& 
ENVIRON 
SHELTER 
& NFIS 
WASH TOTAL 
ESTIMATE 
2020 
ABIOGET 1,589,091 1,589,091 1,750,000 
AIDER 535,000 535,000 550,000 
COOPRESA 18,671 18,671 19,000 
FAO 1,600,000 1,600,000 3,200,000 3,000,000 
IEDA 1,200,000 350,446 1,550,446 1,650,000 
IMC 1,700,000 3,000,000 4,700,000 5,100,000 
IRC 145,431 - 62,458 12,492 49,966 - 44,936 315,283 472,924 
IUCN 1,300,000 1,300,000 1,400,000 
INTERSOS 450,000 350,000 800,000 850,000 
LWF 8,000 1,662,416 650,000 2,320,416 2,400,000 
NRC 605,240 350,243 399,757 1,355,240 1,450,000 
Plan International 700,030 557,879 247,489 342,427 49,412 1,897,237 1,553,195 
Public Concern 500,000 500,000 500,000 
Saheli 100,000 100,000 100,000 
Solidarités International 415,000 415,000 430,000 
UNDP 1,000,000 1,000,000 1,000,000 
UNHCR 8,118,475 1,502,982 539,353 2,614,498 3,014,868 3,957,728 2,611,857 22,359,761 24,000,000 
UNICEF 1,100,000 1,100,000 1,200,000 
UNFPA 450,000 450,000 450,000 
UNWOMEN 500,000 250,000 750,000 800,000 
WESDE Cameroon 550,560 172,150 722,710 180,000 
WFP 18,130,614 18,130,614 17,529,709 
TOTAL 12,071,936 4,866,101 20,682,668 5,874,479 11,627,756 5,157,728 4,828,801 65,109,468 66,384,828 
Financial Requirements - CAMEROON

UNHCR / Olivier Laban-Mattei

CHAD 
REFUGEE RESPONSE PLAN

N I G E R I A 
N I G E R 
C H A D 
C A M E R O O N 
Dar Es Salam 
Refugee locations 
Refugee camp 
Refugee crossing 
2.4 
2.2 
2.1 
1.9 
0.9 
0.8 
Education 0.7 
Shelter & NFI 
WASH 
Health & 
Nutrition 
Livelihoods & 
Environment 
Food security 
Protection 
Requirements | in millions US$ 
2019 PLANNED RESPONSE 
9,000 
REFUGEE 
POPULATION 
20,000 
HOST POPULATION 
TARGETED 
US$ 11M 
REQUIREMENTS 
6PARTNERS 
INVOLVED

R R P > 2 0 1 9 / 2 0 2 0 43 
Country Overview 
Introduction 
In 2018, Chad hosted nearly 11,000 Nigerian refugees in 
its south-western Lake department, which are part of a 
total of nearly 450,000 refugees from Darfur (Sudan) 
and the Central African Republic (CAR) hosted in eastern 
and southern Chad, despite ranking 186th out of 188 
countries in the Human Development Index 2016 
(UNDP). The tensions arising from the terrorist threat 
posed by the Islamic State in West Africa (ISWAP) and 
Boko Haram prompted the Chadian government to 
apply security measures, including a state of emergency 
as well as curfews and restrictions of movement. While 
these restrictions did not impact on the quality of 
asylum, they severely affected the local economy, 
disrupting seasonal migratory movements and the cattle 
trade, as well as hindering cross-border commerce with 
CAR and Nigeria. In order to mitigate the situation 
– compounded by a lack of development and decades 
of humanitarian crises – the Chadian government 
organized an international conference in Paris in 2017 to 
launch its National Development Plan (NDP) 2017-2021, 
securing over USD 20 billion in donor commitments. 
However, with ongoing constitutional and administrative 
reforms in Chad and limited existing capacities to 
receive and implement development initiatives, the flow 
of funds has been slow to materialize. 
The humanitarian needs and protection challenges 
faced by refugees and host communities are vast. In 
Chad’s Lake region, as in the rest of the country, around 
30 per cent of the population is in need of humanitarian 
assistance. Humanitarian crises in Chad are linked to 
lack of development, weak investment in human capital, 
illiteracy, a precarious regional security environment, 
and chronic poverty affecting approximately half of the 
population. Both Chadians and refugees have limited 
access to basic services, the unemployment rate is high, 
and the country needs to cope with the impacts of 
climate change. The developmental deficit and the 
persistence of traditional practices hindering gender 
equality, as well as the weakness of the judicial system 
and local institutions, especially in remote areas, are a 
barrier to a conducive protection environment and for 
the safeguarding of human rights in general. 
On 14 September 2018, the World Bank 
Group Executive Board approved a US$ 60 
million grant to help Chad improve refugee 
and host communities access to basic social 
services and livelihoods and to strengthen 
national refugee management systems. The 
World Bank grant will go to the ‘’Projet d’Appui 
aux Réfugiés et aux Communautés d’Accueil’’ 
commonly known as PARCA. This project aims 
to create conditions for a gradual integration 
of refugees into the social and economic 
fabric of the country while strengthening the 
national structures managing refugees. 
According to official estimates, there will be 
approximately 1.1 million direct and indirect 
beneficiaries of the project located in refugeehosting 
areas in the east and south of Chad 
and around Lake Chad. Some 30 to 40 per 
cent of beneficiaries will be refugees. 
Country Overview - CHAD

44 R R P > 2 0 1 9 / 2 0 2 0 
The absence of a national asylum legislation impacts 
negatively on the well-being of refugees, particularly in 
the context of ensuring access to employment and wider 
socio-economic inclusion. To address this situation, 
Chad needs to adopt a national asylum law which would 
facilitate this access and allow refugees to participate in 
the economic life in the country. In terms of registration, 
the government has significantly improved the reliability 
of data collection, since it started, with UNHCR’s 
support, to apply a biometric identification and 
management system (BIMS) to register refugees. Access 
to informal employment is limited in refugee hosting 
areas because of a lack of job opportunities in general. 
Access to basic services such as water, health and 
education is constrained by the lack of infrastructure. 
Health and education remain among the most illequipped 
sectors in Chad, and nationwide strikes 
among workers in both sectors continue to impact the 
population, including refugees. Efforts made by the 
government to address child protection concerns have 
been recognized by the international community, but 
much remains to be done to provide children - including 
children at risk of statelessness and children associated 
with armed forces - with adequate levels of protection. In 
a context of limited access to social services, poverty, 
and the gradual reduction of humanitarian assistance, 
many children continue to be exposed to child labour to 
help sustain their families and to other protection risks. 
In September 2018, the Government of Chad launched 
the application of the Comprehensive Refugee 
Response Framework (CRRF), which, apart from 
promoting development initiatives for refugee hosting 
areas, also aims to include refugees in existing social 
structures. The CRRF builds on the national forum on the 
socio-economic inclusion of refugees organized in 2017, 
during which participants drew up 42 recommendations 
to promote social inclusion of refugees. In line with the 
Government’s engagement and the CRRF approach, 
education facilities built in refugee camps have followed 
the Chadian curriculum since 2014. In 2018, they were 
officially integrated into the Chadian national education 
system. In 2019, RRP partners will work with Chadian 
authorities to do the same for health facilities and 
vocational training centres. 
Initiatives such as the European Unionsupported 
Développement Intégré des Zones 
d’Accueil (DIZA) project and UNPD’s 
Programme d’Appui au Développement Local 
et à la Finance Inclusive au Tchad (PADLFIT), 
will facilitate the inclusion of refugees in the 
National Development Plan 2017-2021. The 
Government of Chad has adopted its 
National Development Plan (NDP) 2017-2021 
as part of its Strategic Vision paper “The Chad 
that we want in 2030”, which is in line with the 
United Nations Sustainable Development 
Goals (SDGs) for 2030. 
Meanwhile, the United Nations UNDAF 
2017-2021 is also aligned with the 
Government’s NDP 2017-2021 and the 
Strategic Vision 2030. Refugees have been 
included in the UNDAF, particularly in the 
following three Strategic Outcomes: 
(1) Development of human capital, which 
includes equitable access to universal and 
quality education and health care services; 
(2) Social protection; crisis management and 
sustainability; 
(3) Governance, peace and security (which 
includes child protection), a social protection 
system, emergency preparedness, a response 
to crises and disasters, and early recovery. 
The Country Team estimates that some 
US$ 1.3 billion will be needed in the period 
2017-2021 to achieve UNDAF outcomes. 
Country Overview - CHAD 

R R P > 2 0 1 9 / 2 0 2 0 45 
Overall Needs and Strategic Response 
There are an estimated 16,500 Nigerian refugees in 
Chad’s Lake region. As at 31 October a total of 10,930 
are registered with UNHCR and its governmental 
counterpart CNARR (Commission Nationale pour 
l’Accueil et la Réinsertion des Réfugiés et des Rapatriés). 
Among those registered, 7,627 are hosted in Dar Es 
Salam refugee camp near Baga Sola and their protection 
and assistance situation is stable. However, the situation 
of the remaining registered refugees living in the villages 
of Ngouboua and Tchoukoutalia, and the situation of an 
estimated 5,500 unregistered refugees living outside 
the camp in the areas of Litré, Koulfoua and Kinjiriagana, 
face a difficult situation similar to the host population. 
They are exposed to attacks by armed elements and do 
not receive humanitarian assistance. Due to security 
constraints, CNARR and UNHCR have not had access to 
these areas and thus have been unable to register this 
population. In 2019, RRP partners plan to assist 9,000 
Nigerian refugees. 
Prolonged economic crisis, lack of development, 
significant reductions in humanitarian funding, and 
climatic shocks, have caused widespread food 
insecurity, disproportionate levels of malnutrition, and 
weakened community and family resilience of Chadians 
and refugees alike. This situation continues to expose 
vulnerable persons and children to heightened 
protection risks. Given the prevailing instability in 
UNHCR / Ibrahima Diane 
Country Overview - CHAD

46 R R P > 2 0 1 9 / 2 0 2 0 
Nigeria’s Borno State, prospects for a safe and dignified 
return in 2019 remain limited for the vast majority of 
Nigerian refugees. Therefore, in 2019, RRP partners will 
focus on strengthening the self-sufficiency of refugees 
by supporting food security and livelihoods interventions 
to mitigate the rise of malnutrition rates, and improving 
refugee health, education and shelter. 
Education, SGBV prevention and response, and child 
protection will be prioritized in 2019/20. Participatory 
needs assessments conducted in 2018 highlighted 
refugees’ key concerns, with livelihoods opportunities, 
access to arable land and access to energy among their 
most urgent needs. Wherever possible, cash-based 
interventions will be given preference to empower 
refugees and to contribute to the local economy. 
Working closely with the government and development 
partners, particularly the World Bank and its Refugee 
and Host Community Support Project (PARCA) through 
the IDA-18 allocation, and with UNDP through its Support 
Programme to Local Development and Inclusive Finance 
(PADLFIT), humanitarian actors will pursue greater 
socio-economic inclusion of refugees in Chadian society. 
Support to education and health facilities benefiting both 
refugees and local populations will also continue. 
As the refugee response relies on AGD principles an 
inclusive programming approach with the participation 
of women, men, girls and boys will continue to be 
applied. 
Chad’s host populations have for the past 20 years 
shown an outstanding degree of hospitality by 
welcoming refugees and sharing their meagre resources 
with them. In the Lake region, an estimated 162,755 
persons affected by the presence of Boko Haram were 
internally displaced, including returned Chadian 
nationals. Ethnic and cultural similarities with Nigerian 
refugees as well as long-standing cross-border relations 
between the communities are helpful in supporting 
peaceful coexistence and mutual understanding. The 
scarcity of natural resources, however, combined with 
the tangible impact of climate change, have exacerbated 
new tensions that go beyond the recurrent conflicts 
between farmers and herders. In order to address these 
tensions, all programmes are implemented through a 
community-based approach with the aim of enhancing 
resilience and improving living conditions for all 
concerned in a holistic manner. Camp services, such as 
health centres and schools, are open to both refugees 
and host communities. Livelihoods activities targeting 
refugees usually ensure that 30 per cent of beneficiaries 
are host community members. RRP partners are 
increasingly looking for synergies with development 
projects targeting refugee-hosting areas so that both 
displaced and host populations are provided 
opportunities to become self-reliant and to increase their 
resilience. 
UNHCR / Aristophane Ngargoune 
Country Overview - CHAD 

R R P > 2 0 1 9 / 2 0 2 0 47 
Coordination and Partnerships 
The Government of Chad, mainly through CNARR and UNHCR, continues to lead 
and coordinate the inter-agency refugee response at field and national levels, 
based on the Refugee Coordination Model (clusters coordinate the IDP response). 
This includes the coordination of all sector responses of government counterparts, 
UNHCR, and partners. 
The established coordination mechanism is influenced by the application of the 
Comprehensive Refugee Response Framework (CRRF). On 3 May 2018, the 
Republic of Chad formally announced application of the CRRF, subsequently 
launching it on 19 September 2018. Building on the multi-stakeholder approach in 
line with the CRRF, a large variety of partners, under the leadership of the 
Government and supported by UNHCR, will collaborate to help Chad cope with 
the impact of hosting refugees and to pursue durable solutions. The government and partners will strengthen 
resilience as well as engage in development programmes in line with existing national plans. Within this context, the 
Government of Chad will work in close collaboration with UN agencies, NGOs, the World Bank, development actors, 
donors and the private sector. The government has made a number of commitments under a “Letter of Development 
Policy” with the World Bank, and has established an action plan to improve the legal framework and facilitate socioeconomic 
inclusion of refugees in Chad for the duration of their stay. 
RRP actors will also engage the private sector, including technology companies and microfinance institutions, to 
provide learning and livelihood activities and microfinance programmes to support resilience in refugee hosting 
areas. They will work with the National Agency for the Development of Information and Communication Technology 
(ADETIC) to promote new technologies in remote areas and to facilitate access to mobile networks. Digital literacy, 
the development of numerical digital platforms, better use of data, and the improvement of communications and 
connectivity will be addressed as well. 
RRP PARTNERS 
•• HIAS 
•• IRC 
•• UNDP 
•• UNFPA 
•• UNHCR 
•• WFP 
Country Overview - CHAD

48 R R P > 2 0 1 9 / 2 0 2 0 
Planned Response 
Protection 
To date, the presence of Chadian military and armed 
security forces in and around Dar Es Salam refugee 
camp is among the major protection concerns. The 
strictly civilian character of the camp is in peril, and the 
risk of sexual and gender-based violence (SGBV) and 
sexual exploitation and abuse (SEA) makes refugees and 
host populations feel insecure, most importantly, as 
there are insufficient numbers of security personnel to 
guarantee the safety of the camp. As a response, the 
protection sector, together with CNARR, has conducted 
joint training and sensitization sessions for the military. 
The security situation improved slightly in mid-2018, 
when ten gendarmes, including two female officers, 
were deployed to the camp. So far, the presence of 
female police officers has been a reassurance to 
refugee women and girls. 
Another area in which intervention will be required is the 
judicial system: This is currently rather weak, with only 
one justice of the peace and no proper courthouse in 
place. Furthermore, communities are more inclined to 
use traditional conflict resolution structures, which often 
disregard the views of women and girls. This situation is 
exacerbated by the deeply rooted harmful practice of 
child marriages, which continue to take place despite 
sensitization programmes and national legislation that 
prohibits such practice. As a response, in 2019, 
sensitization on women and girls’ rights and sessions on 
SGBV and SEA prevention and response will be 
conducted with refugee and host communities, including 
women, men, girls and boys. With regard to SGBV and 
SEA survivors, RRP partners will provide a holistic 
response including legal, psychosocial, material and 
livelihoods support, access to education, and 
professional training. 
In line with these interventions, the sector will also focus 
on raising awareness on children’s rights in the 
communities to prevent child labour, early marriage and 
violence against children, as well as prevention of 
radicalization of children and youth. Sector partners will 
work on preventive measures to reduce the number of 
POPULATION IN DAR ES SALAM CAMP 
as of 31 October 2018 
7,627 
REGISTERED REFUGEES 
1,195 
NEWLY REGISTERED IN 2018 
Age 
0 300 600 900 1200 1500 
60+ 
18-59 
12-17 
5-11 
0-4 
Demographic representation 
Female Male 
Planned Response - CHAD 

R R P > 2 0 1 9 / 2 0 2 0 49 
children at risk and undertake Best Interest Assessments 
and Best Interest Determination for children, in 
cooperation with governmental social services and 
judiciary bodies. In the case of unaccompanied and 
separated children, cross-border family tracing, family 
reunification and family foster care will be strengthened 
through regular cross-border coordination with UNHCR 
Nigeria and Niger, ICRC, and with child protection 
partners. 
Assistance for persons with specific needs (PSN) will 
also be strengthened in the camp. Currently, over 
700 PSN in Dar Es Salam camp are receiving tailored 
protection and assistance responses, through specific 
livelihoods programmes or women’s groups. These 
interventions have been crucial to help prevent sexual 
exploitation and other negative coping strategies, 
especially for those single-headed households, persons 
with disabilities, elderly or other refugees with specific 
needs, who do not receive the necessary support from 
their own communities. 
In 2019, the protection sector will focus on strengthening 
protection monitoring, in order to guarantee access to 
asylum, preserve the civilian character of the camp, and 
improve the quality of protection of both refugees and 
OBJECTIVE 1: 
Access to asylum and protection is enhanced 
100 representatives of Government authorities, international organizations and civil society trained on refugee protection 
OBJECTIVE 2: 
Refugees are registered and receive appropriate documentation, and access to civil registration and documentation is 
enhanced 
100% of refugees registered on an individual basis and received appropriate documentation 
3,376 refugees aged 18 years+ hold an individual identity document 
360 refugee children issued with birth certificates 
OBJECTIVE 3: 
The civilian and humanitarian character of refugee hosting area is maintained and humanitarian access as well as civilmilitary 
coordination are strengthened 
150 military and security forces trained on human rights and humanitarian principles 
OBJECTIVE 4: 
Persons with specific needs are safe and receive appropriate preventive, responsive and restorative services 
250 children at risk identified, followed up and effective response provided 
200 persons trained on SGBV prevention and response 
8 community groups operational for SGBV prevention and response 
OBJECTIVE 5: 
Refugees are assisted through a comprehensive solutions approach 
10 communal disputes resolved through local social cohesion mechanism to promote peaceful coexistence with local 
communities 
Resilience 
Planned Response - CHAD

50 R R P > 2 0 1 9 / 2 0 2 0 
host populations through individual and communitybased 
interventions. RRP partners under the lead of 
UNHCR will, together with relevant government entities, 
continue to work on consolidating the legal framework 
on asylum and protection and preparing the adoption of 
the Asylum Law and its subsequent implementation. This 
includes capacitating CNARR, the Chadian birth 
registration entity Direction des Affaires Politiques et de 
l’Etat Civil (DAPEC), and other national and local 
authorities. In order to raise awareness on protection 
issues and to support the most vulnerable refugees and 
individuals in host communities, the capacities of 
communities will be strengthened to mobilise, identify 
and seek solutions to protection risks and violations. In 
this regard, access to legal remedies and to assistance 
will also be enhanced. 
Mechanisms for the issuance of civil status documents 
will be strengthened by supporting relevant Chadian 
national authorities. Advocacy will also focus on freedom 
of movement, equitable access to land, access to work 
and financial services that can facilitate socio-economic 
inclusion and economic opportunities for refugees and 
host communities. 
UNHCR / Ibrahima Diane 
Planned Response - CHAD 

R R P > 2 0 1 9 / 2 0 2 0 51 
Education 
Education sector partners will focus on supporting the 
authorities’ management of refugee education, now that 
all schools built in refugee camps and sites are formal 
Chadian schools. Currently, there are two primary 
schools and one child-friendly space in Dar Es Salam 
camp. Both schools are the only ones available in the 
area and also serve nearby villages. As a result, one in 
three pupils attending the camp schools is Chadian 
(762 out of a total 2,233 children enrolled). Compared to 
the previous school-year 2016-17, enrolment in primary 
schools has increased by 23 per cent, the majority of the 
new 415 pupils being Chadian. 
2019 is expected to follow the same pattern. However, 
the education infrastructures are already at full capacity: 
The 385 children attending the child-friendly space in 
2017-18 shared a single tent and there is only one 
durable classroom for 186 children in primary school. 
In September 2018, a secondary school opened in Dar 
Es Salam camp with only one, unequipped classroom, 
which will host the first cohort of Chadian students. At 
least three additional classrooms, equipment, and an 
office will be needed in the years to come. 
As regards the quality of education, there is currently an 
average of one teacher per 83 children, which is far from 
the UN standard of 50 students per teacher. Stateemployed 
teachers appointed in the camp often leave 
their functions due to the hard living conditions in the 
area. Consequently, significant needs remain. 
In 2019, partners in the education sector will focus on 
supporting central and local authorities in managing 
refugee education, in line with the CRRF approach, as all 
the schools built in refugee camps and sites are now 
formally following the Chadian curriculum and are part of 
the Chadian education system. However, continued 
support will be essential in making the integration of 
refugee schools in the Chadian system a success. 
RRP partners will facilitate access to education and strive 
to improve retention rates by making schools more 
conducive to learning. This includes providing children 
with more and better equipped classrooms, learning 
materials, and more teachers. Partners will also conduct 
awareness-raising sessions with parents on the 
importance of education. Special attention will be given 
to girls and children with specific needs. 
Partners will continue supporting the management of 
education facilities by communities themselves, in order 
to empower them and create a sense of ownership, thus 
contributing to the long-term improvement of education. 
This includes offering livelihoods opportunities to 
members of the Parent Teacher Association. 
OBJECTIVE 1: 
Population has optimal access to education 
2,500 students enrolled in primary education 
21 teachers trained for capacity strengthening 
15 classrooms built and equipped for secondary education 
Resilience 
Planned Response - CHAD

52 R R P > 2 0 1 9 / 2 0 2 0 
Food security 
Efforts to sustain food assistance to refugees have been 
jeopardized by severe cuts in funding, which forced RRP 
partners to drastically reduce its food assistance on 
which most refugees still rely. In 2017, WFP, UNHCR, and 
CNAAR conducted a socio-economic profiling exercise 
for refugees in Chad. This categorized Nigerian refugees 
into three groups: highly vulnerable (83.5 per cent), 
moderately vulnerable (9.6 per cent) and less vulnerable 
(6.9 per cent). Following the definition of different 
vulnerability categories, a consumption gap analysis was 
carried out, firstly, to identify the consumption gaps 
within each of the different vulnerability categories, and 
secondly, to propose adjustments in food rations for 
each vulnerability category. 
Based on this analysis and available resources, the 
proposed ration for highly vulnerable refugees stands at 
1,279 kcal per person per day (60 per cent of the 
2,100 kcal per person per day required to cover daily 
nutritional needs) and at 1,065 kcal for moderately 
vulnerable refugees (51 per cent of the required daily 
minimum). Less vulnerable refugees will no longer be 
prioritized for unconditional food assistance. 
This situation exposes the most vulnerable refugees to 
increased food insecurity and malnutrition. In addition, 
this alarming situation jeopardizes the gains already 
made to stabilize the nutritional status of refugees. 
There is therefore an urgent need for increased food 
support and prevention of malnutrition whilst investing in 
significant livelihoods activities. 
RRP partners will therefore develop a multiyear 
livelihoods and resilience programme, based on the 
WFP-UNHCR-CNARR socio-economic profiling, to 
provide a framework for strengthening resilience, in 
collaboration with development actors. A gradual 
approach to empower households will be implemented 
as of 2019, whereby food assistance will be prioritized 
for households considered as less likely to become 
self-reliant. Meanwhile, livelihoods activities will target 
the least vulnerable refugees hence those, who are 
expected to become self-reliant. Food assistance for the 
most vulnerable households will be considered as a 
social safety net and a protection tool. In the meantime, 
the sector will carefully review the support and 
assistance given to those refugees expected to become 
self-reliant, to document the transition process and build 
a model for tailored support. Investment in livelihoods 
must be significant in order to have a meaningful impact 
and avoid leaving the least vulnerable categories sliding 
back into poverty. 
Wherever appropriate, cash-based interventions will be 
gradually implemented, with a focus on monitoring tools 
to evaluate the impact of current activities and help 
design future interventions. 
OBJECTIVE 1: 
Food security improved 
8,032 persons received food assistance 
OBJECTIVE 2: 
Food security strengthened 
490 persons met consumption needs through seeds and 
agricultural tools received 
Resilience 
Planned Response - CHAD 

UNHCR / Ibrahima Diane

54 R R P > 2 0 1 9 / 2 0 2 0 
Health & Nutrition 
The health and nutrition situation in Chad is 
characterized by the persistence of communicable 
diseases such as malaria, respiratory infections, measles 
and diarrhoea, exacerbated by a precarious overall 
nutritional situation. Malnutrition rates are on the rise 
throughout the country. Out of 23 regions, 12 have been 
declared a nutritional emergency in 2018, since their 
Global Acute Malnutrition (GAM) rates exceeded the 
WHO Emergency threshold of 15 per cent. The 
nutritional situation in refugee camps, however, is 
significantly better than that of host villages. 
In the Lake region, primary health-care institutions 
cannot cover the demand. Existing health centres 
frequently operate beyond capacity due to limited 
resources. Over half of the patients using the Dar Es 
Salam camp’s health centre come from nearby villages 
and IDP sites. 
In 2019, the sector will focus on strengthening health 
services and supporting the gradual transfer of refugee 
services into the national health system, including 
agreement on a formal transition plan with clear terms of 
reference. Special attention will be given to build 
technical capacity and increase the number of trained 
staff. As the health sector transitions from free provision 
of health services in the camp for both refugees and 
host community members to integration into the national 
system, national health facilities must be strengthened in 
order to respond to the needs of refugees and host 
populations. 
A cost-reimbursement system is gradually being 
implemented, with refugees already paying a small 
contribution (USD 0.20) to access health services. 
Contributions are managed by a committee to cover 
small-scale maintenance and repairs. This will be 
replaced by a contribution-based system by 2020, 
whereby refugees will access health facilities on par with 
host communities. The response will pay specific 
attention to maternal and reproductive health, mental 
health as well as the HIV/AIDS programme for 
communities in general and for pregnant women and 
children under five in particular. 
The nutritional situation in Chad is characterized by 
alarming high levels of acute severe malnutrition well 
above WHO’s 10 per cent emergency threshold and by 
high rates of Global Acute Malnutrition (GAM) above the 
15 per cent threshold. 
The trend in GAM over the last three years is of 
particular concern, as it increases underlying health and 
protection risks. According to the 2018 SMART national 
nutritional survey, the GAM rate in Chad stands at 
13.5 per cent compared to 17.8 in 2017, 11.9 in 2016, and 
11.7 in 2015. 
The stunting rate is also on the rise throughout Chad 
with 31.9 per cent (2018 SMART national survey) 
compared to 32.4 in 2017 and to 26.2 in 2016. 
OBJECTIVE 1: 
Health status improved 
70 local health workers trained 
300 persons referred to secondary and tertiary health care 
1,305 children vaccinated against measles 
OBJECTIVE 2: 
Implementation of integrated management of acute 
malnutrition programmes ensured 
1,069 children screened, identified, and admitted to MAM 
and SAM treatments 
Resilience 
Planned Response - CHAD 

R R P > 2 0 1 9 / 2 0 2 0 55 
UNHCR / Xavier Bourgois 
Stunting can have serious long-term consequences on 
child development. Finally, anaemia is also widespread 
in Chad with a rate of 65.6 per cent according to the 
2018 national survey compared to 61.5 per cent in 2017. 
These findings are consistent with the overall nutritional 
situation in the Sahelian belt region. It is worth noting 
that GAM rates are higher among host communities than 
in Dar Es Salam camp. 
In response, the sector will continue to support 
treatment of acute malnutrition while also focusing on a 
multi-sectoral response to address the various root 
causes of malnutrition, including limited access to land 
and potable water, but also cultural causes such as lack 
of diversified dietary habits and no regular breastfeeding 
of infants. All interventions will be carried out together 
with livelihoods activities, community sensitization on 
health and WASH with a focus on the empowerment of 
women. Food production is restricted by limited access 
to agricultural land, frequent drought, limited access to 
seeds and tools and few livelihoods opportunities. As a 
result, a comprehensive food assistance programme will 
also be needed to improve the nutritional status of 
refugees. 
Planned Response - CHAD

56 R R P > 2 0 1 9 / 2 0 2 0 
Livelihoods & Environment 
While continuing to provide life-saving assistance, 
humanitarian actors will focus on the effective socioeconomic 
inclusion of refugees. As agricultural activities 
are essential to the empowerment of refugees advocacy 
efforts will focus on securing access to arable land. 
Value chains will also be explored to create new 
opportunities while vocational training offers will be 
increased. Livelihoods activities will reinforce peaceful 
coexistence. Due to funding shortages, only 19 per cent 
of refugees received livelihoods support so far. 
Over time, livelihoods interventions will be crucial in the 
transition from relief assistance to a sustainable, longterm 
development plan, through close collaboration with 
development actors, government services and the 
private sector. This includes joint advocacy with the 
government for the adoption of a national asylum law 
guaranteeing economic rights to refugees in Chad, in 
line with the recommendations of the National Forum on 
sustainable and socio-economic inclusion of refugees 
and the CRRF approach applied by Chad. Targeted 
initiatives to boost self-sufficiency, resilience and 
self-reliance are key in refugee hosting areas, focusing 
on both host and refugee communities. Partners, such 
as the World Bank and the European Union’s Emergency 
Trust Fund for Africa, will be closely associated. 
Inclusive finance will be promoted as a key enabler of 
economic growth and poverty alleviation, given its ability 
to boost job creation, reduce vulnerability to shocks and 
increase investments in human capital. RRP partners will 
continue to invest in reinforcing institutional capacity and 
fostering key partnerships with the private sector and 
development actors, promoting access to financial 
services for refugees to stimulate economic activity at 
community levels. 
To mitigate the increased environmental impact caused 
by refugees, interventions in the environment sector will 
promote community-based mechanisms to manage 
wood resources and reforestation while promoting 
agro-forestry and agricultural best practices. Village 
committees and environmental clubs will be set up to 
raise awareness on environment-related issues. The 
Water and Forest Inspection will support committees in 
the production of seedlings, reforestation, natural 
regeneration and management of sites. 
Access to energy is a major concern for refugees. As 
25 per cent of households have energy-saving stoves, 
the response will focus on improving the coverage 
among refugees and local households around the camp. 
Providing alternative energy will diminish the pressure 
on natural resources and foster peaceful coexistence. In 
addition, the supply of alternative fuel sources will 
alleviate dependency on firewood. Energy-saving 
equipment, such as Banco and AFRAH stoves, will be 
produced locally and distributed, and awareness-raising 
sessions on rational use and on energy-saving practices 
will be conducted. 
OBJECTIVE 1: 
Self reliance and livelihoods improved 
3,500 persons meet part of households needs through 
production kits for agricultural/fishery/livestock activities 
400 persons supported to start an income-generating 
activity 
OBJECTIVE 2: 
Natural resources and shared environment better 
protected 
2,500 tree seedlings planted to mitigate deforestation 
Resilience 
Planned Response - CHAD 

R R P > 2 0 1 9 / 2 0 2 0 57 
Shelter & NFIs 
The sectoral response for 2019/20 will aim at covering 
the shelter needs of newly-arrived refugees and 
improving the shelter conditions of those already settled 
in the camp. In this regard, it will seek to align itself with 
the Security and Development Plan for the Lake region 
which is currently being prepared by the government. It 
will also harmonize planning with the Shelter and NFI 
strategy of the CCCM/Shelter/ NFI cluster which focuses 
on shelter and NFI needs of IDPs and Chadian returned 
nationals in Chad’s Lake region. 
The sector will continue to provide newly-arrived 
refugees with emergency shelter and core relief items, 
either through in-kind distribution or cash-based 
interventions. It will also focus on transitioning from 
emergency shelters to locally adapted, semi-permanent 
shelters that are similar to those of the host population 
as part of a phased response strategy. 
The shelter strategy will focus on empowering 
communities, through the use of cash-based 
interventions, distribution of tool kits and training on best 
practices so that refugees can build their own shelter 
themselves. Persons with specific needs will be assisted 
to build their shelter through community-based support 
committees. Communal infrastructure such as schools, 
health centres, training centres, women and youth 
centres, distribution points and child-friendly spaces will 
be constructed, rehabilitated and maintained with the 
involvement of the local community. 
In addition to distributing non-food-items to newlyarrived 
refugees and replacing some NFIs for previously 
arrived refugees, in line with standards, the sector will 
distribute dignity kits to women of reproductive age. 
OBJECTIVE 1: 
Shelter and infrastructure established, improved and 
maintained 
33 persons trained and equipped for shelter construction 
2,270 households living in adequate dwellings 
OBJECTIVE 2: 
Population has sufficient basic and domestic items 
100% of domestic item needs in the camp met 
2,697 dignitary kits provided 
Resilience 
Planned Response - CHAD

58 R R P > 2 0 1 9 / 2 0 2 0 
WASH 
Unlike in other Nigerian refugee hosting areas, the 
amount of drinking water available per person and per 
day in Chad’s Lake region has never fallen under 
emergency standards. In Dar Es Salam camp, refugees 
have access to an average of 25 litres per person per 
day, above the global SPHERE standard of 20 litres per 
person per day. 
There are currently 11 water committees handling water 
management in the camp. In 2019, a cost-recovery 
system will gradually be implemented. The sector’s 
overall objective will focus on ensuring the standards of 
20/L/p/d. Over the medium term, sustainable water 
infrastructure, such as gravity systems and hand pumps, 
will be made available to cover human consumption as 
well as livestock and agricultural needs. 
However, in terms of sanitation infrastructure, Dar Es 
Salam camp is well below standards, with only 19 per 
cent of households having access to latrines. The nature 
of the soil makes it difficult to construct sustainable 
latrines and the few latrines that have been built are 
filling up quickly due to the high number of users. Some 
2,270 drainable latrines will need to be constructed with 
local materials in the camp. The sector will therefore 
focus on expanding access to sanitation, by building 
family and institutional latrines while improving solid 
waste management, to avoid epidemics and degradation 
of the environment. 
OBJECTIVE 1: 
Supply of potable water increased or maintained 
20 litres of potable water available per person per day 
46 boreholes rehabilitated and/or constructed 
OBJECTIVE 2: 
Sanitation and hygiene condition enhanced 
2,000 family latrines constructed 
1 waste pit constructed 
Resilience 
Planned Response - CHAD 

R R P > 2 0 1 9 / 2 0 2 0 59 
Financial Requirements 
By Organization & Sector 
ORGANIZATION PROT EDU 
FOOD 
SEC 
HEALTH 
& NUTR 
LIVELIHOODS 
& 
ENVIRON 
SHELTER 
& NFIS 
WASH TOTAL 
ESTIMATE 
2020 
HIAS 757,219 343,757 42,938 151,596 1,295,511 1,200,000 
IRC 361,291 168,816 530,108 600,000 
UNDP 1,250,000 1,250,000 1,500,000 
UNHCR 1,687,614 355,475 952,144 724,463 763,983 698,164 5,181,844 4,900,000 
UNFPA 600,000 600,000 1,007,171 
WFP 2,125,799 2,125,799 2,144,766 
TOTAL 2,444,833 699,232 2,168,737 1,913,436 2,126,060 763,983 866,981 10,983,262 11,351,937 
Financial Requirements - CHAD

UNHCR / Louise Donovan

NIGER 
REFUGEE RESPONSE PLAN

N I G E R I A 
N I G E R 
C H A D 
C A M E R O O N 
Sayam Forage 
Refugee locations 
Refugee camp 
Refugee crossing 
12.8 
11.8 
11.2 
9 
7.4 
3.7 
Education 3 
Health & 
Nutrition 
WASH 
Livelihoods & 
Environment 
Protection 
Food security 
Shelter & NFI 
Requirements | in millions US$ 
2019 PLANNED RESPONSE 
120,000 
REFUGEE 
POPULATION 
15,500 
HOST POPULATION 
TARGETED 
US$ 59 M 
REQUIREMENTS 
26 
PARTNERS 
INVOLVED

R R P > 2 0 1 9 / 2 0 2 0 63 
Country Overview 
Introduction 
In 2018, recurrent attacks against the civilian population 
by Boko Haram in Niger’s Diffa region continued to 
negatively impact the economy and social cohesion in a 
poor region already affected by a structural agropastoral 
crisis. The Government maintained the state of 
emergency and proceeded with a counter-insurgency 
military operation “Amni Farkhat” carried out by the 
Multinational Joint Taskforce (MNJTF) between April and 
July. Combined with heavy rainfall and a rise in the 
seasonal water level of the Komadougou River, this 
initiative resulted in a temporary reduction of security 
incidents. The related curfew and restriction of 
movements of people and goods, however, adversely 
affected the regional economy, causing people to resort 
to negative coping mechanisms. 
According to official government figures, some 250,000 
people, including refugees, returned nationals, and 
internally displaced persons (IDPs) are currently 
scattered across 147 sites in the Diffa region. Most of the 
refugees and IDPs are hosted by local communities. The 
majority of the over 118,000 Nigerian refugees (13 per 
cent of Diffa’s population) live in out-of-camp settings, 
while 12,000 refugees settled in Sayam Forage, the only 
refugee camp in the area. 
With the technical support of UNHCR, from September 
2017 to March 2018 the Government initiated a 
comprehensive registration exercise using the Biometric 
Identity Management System (BIMS). This exercise 
collected data on the refugee and IDP population - with 
biometric identity documents issued to refugees. 
In 2019/20 this information, regularly updated, will 
continue to serve as a basis for RRP actors to assist the 
most vulnerable in a coordinated and streamlined 
manner in line with the Refugee Coordination Model. 
The economic situation in the region remains critical. 
Due to security constraints, populations are unable to 
pursue their traditional livelihood activities, such as the 
production of red pepper, fishing, and herding. 
Furthermore, the region suffers from depletion of natural 
resources, food insecurity affecting people and their 
livestock, and lack of income among rural families 
including refugee households. 
As a result of the UNHCR/World Bank partnership, Niger 
was selected to receive funds from the World Bank’s IDA 
18 refugee sub-window to revitalize economic activities 
and infrastructure in poorly developed areas hosting 
refugees. In 2019/20, the humanitarian response will 
include resilience as a necessary link between 
humanitarian and development interventions. 
Country Overview - NIGER

64 R R P > 2 0 1 9 / 2 0 2 0 
UNHCR / Louise Donovan 
Overall Needs and Strategic Response 
The humanitarian crisis in Diffa is a mixed situation in 
which refugees, IDPs, returned nationals, and the local 
host population live side-by-side. It is expected that in 
2019 some 120,000 Nigerian refugees and 15,500 host 
community members will be in need of humanitarian 
assistance. 
Participatory Age, Gender and Diversity (AGD) 
assessments carried out in 2018 have highlighted a 
number of protection concerns. Although Nigerian 
refugees have been provided with documentation their 
movement continues to be restricted and refugees are 
at risk of being arbitrarily detained. Sexual-and Gender- 
Based Violence (SGBV) continues to be reported in high 
numbers. Abuse, exploitation, and neglect of children is 
an ongoing issue. Youth have no access to jobs and the 
out-of-camp refugees face challenges in accessing basic 
services such as health centres, schools, water, 
sanitation and shelter. The level of self-reliance, 
especially for women and youth, is limited. 
To address these issues in 2019 and 2020, RRP partners 
will strengthen the protection environment through 
increased community-based protection interventions. 
The focus will be placed on women, youth, children and 
individuals with specific needs, notably SGBV survivors, 
by increasing awareness on SGBV prevention including 
in Sayam Forage camp. Providing specific assistance for 
people with special needs will remain challenging, 
unless partners receive sufficient funding. Ongoing 
pendular movements of refugees to and from Nigeria 
will require increased monitoring capacity at the border 
and an adjusted response for those refugees wishing to 
return. The issuance of identity documents to refugees 
will continue based on information collected through the 
BIMS. 
Secondly, RRP partners will aim to improve refugee 
access to basic services and infrastructure by adopting a 
transitional approach with government authorities at 
central and local levels, which focuses on durable water 
and sanitation infrastructure. Transitional shelters will be 
set up in Sayam Forage refugee camp and the most 
stable sites, while emergency shelters will be 
established in less stable areas. RRP partners will 
introduce a resilience approach to ensure that assisted 
populations are capable of coping with a volatile security 
situation in the region. If the security situation permits, 
Cash-Based Interventions will be carried out through the 
provision of cash/vouchers in some areas in lieu of 
in-kind food and non-food items. 
Thirdly, RRP partners will support refugee self-reliance 
and local integration through programmes targeting 
refugees and host populations. Expanding the number 
of beneficiaries of income generation activities will be 
essential towards gradually decreasing their 
dependency on humanitarian aid and support their local 
integration. Cash-Based Interventions will provide initial 
funding for business start-ups and/or small-scale 
business expansion, while access to microcredit and 
other financial services will be facilitated. 
Country Overview - NIGER 

R R P > 2 0 1 9 / 2 0 2 0 65 
These interventions will be coupled with advocacy for 
access to land through the permanent urbanization 
programme, which also benefits host populations. In 
collaboration with the town halls the allocation of plots 
will continue and legal documents will attest property 
ownership. Strengthening the nexus of humanitarian, 
social cohesion and development programmes, through 
increased interactions between all stakeholders 
including financial development institutions such as the 
World Bank will continue to be essential for the refugee 
response in the region. This complementarity will enable 
humanitarian actors to address emergency situations, 
while allowing development actors to work on more 
durable interventions. 
Coordination and Partnerships 
Most refugees, IDPs and returned nationals are living 
together with host populations in a mixed out-of-camp 
situation. The response is coordinated by the Governor 
of Diffa. Regional sectoral working groups are led by 
regional technical directorates and supported by 
humanitarian actors. An Inter-Agency Coordination 
Committee, co-led by UNHCR and OCHA, and directly 
linked to the Humanitarian Country Team, ensures the 
interface between humanitarian agencies and the 
authorities. UNHCR works closely with the Governor and 
the Humanitarian Country Team in leading the refugee 
response, and technical specialists within each working 
group ensure that refugee issues are addressed. In line 
with the “Mixed Situation Coordination in practice,” 
UNHCR uses the coordination platform of clusters and 
sector Working Groups, while remaining accountable for 
the refugee response in all sectors. 
Since September 2017, a government-led 
decentralization process has increased the responsibility 
and autonomy of Regional Councils and communes in 
four key sectors - education, health, environment and 
water/sanitation. Since then, a sectoral working group 
platform has been set up in Diffa. Increased interaction 
between humanitarian agencies and local entities will 
therefore be essential. 
In parallel, refugee inclusion in local development plans 
will be prioritized in 2019/20. It is foreseen that this will 
be facilitated by the ‘Crisis Recovery Plan’ for Diffa that 
was introduced by the national High Authority for the 
Consolidation of Peace. Civil-military coordination has 
improved, after bi-monthly meetings discussing 
protection of civilians among other issues were 
established in 2017. 
RRP PARTNERS 
•• ACF 
•• ACTED 
•• CARE 
•• CONCERN 
•• COOPI 
•• CROIX ROUGE 
LUXEMBOURGEOISE 
•• DIKO 
•• DRC 
•• FAO 
•• IMC 
•• IOM 
•• IRC 
•• OXFAM 
•• PLAN 
INTERNATIONAL 
•• SAVE THE 
CHILDREN 
•• SDO 
•• SFCG 
•• SOS VILLAGE 
D’ENFANTS 
•• UNDP 
•• UNFPA 
•• UNHCR 
•• UNICEF 
•• WFP 
•• WHH 
•• WHO 
•• WORLD VISION 
Country Overview - NIGER

66 R R P > 2 0 1 9 / 2 0 2 0 
Planned Response 
Protection 
While RRP partners made progress in 2018, the 
protection environment in the Diffa region remains 
precarious. Movements of refugees across the border 
and within the country remain frequent. Due to limited 
humanitarian access and assistance in out-of-camp 
settings and a lack of sustainable activities, Nigerian 
refugees tend to move in search of livelihood 
opportunities elsewhere. In view of this, protection and 
border monitoring will have to be strengthened in 2019. 
The BIMS conducted in 2018 by the Niger Government 
with technical and financial support of UNHCR, 
registered 249,827 persons of concern, (29,133 
households), out of which 118,868 are refugees. 
Several evaluations, including Age, Gender and Diversity 
participatory assessments, helped to highlight various 
protection concerns - lack of documentation; insecurity 
due to armed groups; lack of freedom of movement and 
police harassment because security forces often do not 
recognize or accept the refugee identity documents. 
The protection sector remains concerned by the 
incidence of SGBV, by child protection issues such as 
lack of access to education, insufficient identification of 
unaccompanied minors or separated children, as well as 
the idleness of young people which leaves them at 
increased risk of recruitment by armed groups. 
Moreover, an increase in inter-community conflict 
remains a concern. In 2019, protection actors plan to 
assist an estimated total of 120,000 refugees in Sayam 
Forage and outside the camp and 15,500 host 
community members. 
The sector plans to further develop and strengthen 
protection activities in host villages, while maintaining a 
sustained presence in Sayam Forage camp. Partners will 
focus on increasing peaceful coexistence and 
addressing the abuse of refugee rights. Access to civil 
status for 6,200 children born in Niger will be provided, 
thereby reducing the risk of statelessness. 
POPULATION IN SAYAM FORAGE CAMP 
as of 31 October 2018 
13,376 
REGISTERED REFUGEES 
1,625 
NEWLY REGISTERED IN 2018 
Age 
0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 
60+ 
18-60 
12-17 
5-11 
0-4 
Demographic representation 
Female Male 
Planned Response - NIGER 

R R P > 2 0 1 9 / 2 0 2 0 67 
The response to SGBV is planned through a holistic 
approach (medical, psychosocial and legal support) 
reinforced by socio-economic reintegration activities. 
While SGBV survivors will be assisted, communities will 
receive further training on SGBV prevention. 
Furthermore, protection sector partners plan to conduct 
trainings for local communities on legal rights of SBGV 
survivors. 
Community-based protection committees (30 for child 
protection and 45 for SGBV) will be supported and 
efforts will be made to assist 3,100 refugees with specific 
needs. Within child protection, partners will prioritize the 
identification of children-at-risk, enhance assistance to 
survivors of violence, abuse and exploitation, and 
encourage the participation of communities in these 
efforts. 
As the verification process and biometric registration will 
be ongoing, a greater involvement of the government 
and capacity building of civil services will be required. 
Also, advocacy to improve the freedom of movement of 
refugees and their access to basic services will be 
prioritized. 
In order to enhance refugee protection as a whole, the 
Governor has set up a framework to begin the transition 
to development with strengthened collaboration 
between state services and humanitarian actors. 
OBJECTIVE 1: 
Access to asylum and protection is enhanced 
1,200 representatives of Government authorities, 
international organizations and civil society trained on 
refugee protection 
OBJECTIVE 2: 
Refugees are registered and receive appropriate 
documentation, and access to civil registration and 
documentation is enhanced 
100% of refugees registered on an individual basis and 
received appropriate documentation 
45,000 refugees newly registered 
6,200 children registered and received delayed birth 
certificates 
OBJECTIVE 3: 
The civilian and humanitarian character of refugee 
hosting areas is maintained and humanitarian access as 
well as civil-military coordination are strengthened 
150 military and security forces trained on human rights and 
humanitarian principles 
OBJECTIVE 4: 
Persons with specific needs are safe and receive 
appropriate preventive, responsive and restorative 
services 
3,576 children at risk identified, followed up and effective 
response provided 
516 SGBV survivors received psychosocial, legal and 
socio-economic support 
45 community groups operational for SGBV prevention and 
response 
3,000 persons with specific needs received non-cash 
support 
OBJECTIVE 5: 
Refugees are assisted through a comprehensive solutions 
approach 
25 communal disputes resolved through local social 
cohesion mechanism to promote peaceful coexistence with 
local communities 
Resilience 
Planned Response - NIGER

68 R R P > 2 0 1 9 / 2 0 2 0 
Education 
In 2018, various assessments carried out by the Ministry 
of Education highlighted serious shortcomings in the 
quality of primary education with a recorded gap of 
more than 700 teachers among the most serious 
concerns. Other findings confirmed that girls continue to 
be denied access to education, mainly by their parents, 
and are often forced to quit or interrupt their schooling 
because of early pregnancies. Furthermore, boys and 
girls are being forced to beg and exposed to child 
labour. In addition, access to schools is non-existent in 
remote areas and the volatile security situation often 
prevents children from attending class. This situation is 
compounded by a lack of emergency classes intended 
to accommodate refugee children and the unwillingness 
of many parents to expose their children to western 
education. 
In response to these challenges the Government of 
Niger and RRP partners have developed an approach to 
ensure participation and representation of refugees in 
the education management committees. Since 2014, 
four distance education centres were set up in the Diffa 
region, complemented by one centre in Sayam Forage 
refugee camp and one in Bosso, established in 2017, to 
enable refugee children to access quality education. 
In 2019/20, RRP partners aim to ensure that children, 
both in Sayam Forage and out-of-camp sites, can access 
quality education. Currently all refugee children study 
under the francophone curriculum of Niger. RRP partners 
will also continue to support and strengthen the 
education system and provide vocational training for 
refugee children and host populations under the 
supervision of the Ministry of Education. The response 
will include capacity building of teachers and tutors in 
distance education centres. 
The provision of specific assistance to vulnerable 
refugee children enrolled in primary education will be 
prioritized. For secondary education and vocational 
training, the focus will be placed on enhancing the 
capacity of both examination centres in Diffa and on 
increasing access of young refugees above school-age 
to vocational training and literacy classes. RRP partners 
will also advocate for increased access to DAFI 
scholarships and grant scholarships to refugee students 
admitted to universities in Niger. 
OBJECTIVE 1: 
Population has optimal access to education 
3,107 students enrolled in primary education 
574 students enrolled in secondary education 
273 teachers received capacity strengthening 
Resilience 
UNHCR / Louise Donovan 
Planned Response - NIGER 

R R P > 2 0 1 9 / 2 0 2 0 69 
Food security 
Food security in Diffa has structural and cyclical 
weaknesses as the region is subject to drought, floods 
and recurrent locust invasions. At the same time, the 
Boko Haram conflict has led to an increase in the 
number of vulnerable populations. These factors have 
negatively impacted host communities and refugees in a 
region where basic commodities are inaccessible due to 
the poor purchasing power of the population. Moreover, 
since 2015, security restrictions cut the population off 
from their traditional livelihood activities. In 2018, RRP 
partners estimated that over 318,000 people were 
affected by food insecurity in Diffa. Food assistance was 
among the prioritized humanitarian needs but in May 
2018 only 33.2 per cent of needed funding had been 
received. 
The mapping of vulnerable agro-pastoral areas 
conducted in April 2018 found that 606 farming villages 
with a population of 326,615 people are to some extent 
affected by a decrease in livelihoods and agricultural 
production. In this context, the impact of interventions in 
the food security sector and the potential for greater 
economic autonomy for refugees remains limited. 
In response to this situation the food security sector is 
providing food assistance to 70,800 refugees and 
123,242 vulnerable IDPs, returnees and host 
communities on a monthly basis. Given that the food 
needs are extremely high across the entire population in 
Diffa and due to severe funding constraints, the food 
security sector will not be able to target all 120,000 
refugees in Diffa, and will therefore prioritize the most 
vulnerable. 
Consequently, in 2019 the sectoral response for over 
62,000 refugees and vulnerable host populations will 
include direct in-kind food assistance to the 12,000 
refugees living in Sayam Forage camp. The sector aims 
to provide a standard ration of 2,100 Kcal/person/day, 
provided there is sufficient funding. The most vulnerable 
50,000 refugees living in out-of-camp settings will also 
receive in-kind food assistance. This response will 
include the maintenance of programmes for refugees to 
improve their livelihoods while refugee access to 
markets will be facilitated. 
Development and humanitarian actors will help maintain 
livestock by providing fodder and veterinary services for 
affected farmers while rehabilitating water points. High 
quality seeds and agricultural tools will be distributed to 
vulnerable households. Vulnerability criteria will be 
harmonized in collaboration with government 
counterparts, refugees and host community members, in 
order to improve the effectiveness and efficiency of 
assistance provided. Money transfer or cash grants will 
be provided to vulnerable households in accessible 
areas. 
OBJECTIVE 1: 
Food security improved 
62,369 persons received food assistance 
OBJECTIVE 2: 
Food security strengthened 
2,000 persons met consumption needs through seeds and 
agricultural tools received 
OBJECTIVE 3: 
Promote women’s community engagement in food 
security through income generation activities 
40 women’s groups operational for income-generating 
activities 
Resilience 
Planned Response - NIGER

70 R R P > 2 0 1 9 / 2 0 2 0 
Health & Nutrition 
The Diffa region has 51 Integrated Health Centres for 
primary health care. The health centre in Sayam Forage 
camp provides direct primary health care and secondary 
care through a referral system, covering some 15,500 
people including refugees. The overall mortality rate in 
the first semester of 2018 stood at 0.74 for 1,000 people. 
According to a health and nutrition survey carried out in 
2017 in Diffa, less than two out of every ten children are 
vaccinated against preventable diseases. The 
prevalence of HIV/AIDS reaches 0.7 per cent within the 
refugee community, compared to the national rate of 
0.4 per cent. According to the Nutrition Survey (SMART 
Method) conducted in November 2017, the malnutrition 
situation improved considerably among children in IDP 
sites from 13.6 per cent GAM and 2.4 per cent SAM in 
2016, to 8.9 GAM and 1.7 SAM in 2017, and in Sayam 
Forage refugee camp from 12.3 per cent GAM and 1.6 
per cent SAM in 2016, to 6.0 GAM and 0.7 SAM in 2017. 
The survey indicated that about 54 per cent of infants 
under the age of six months were exclusively breastfed 
(65.9 per cent in the refugee camp). Sayam Forage 
camp also reported the highest prevalence of a 
Minimum Acceptable Diet (37.3 per cent) demonstrating 
the effectiveness of Infant and Young Child Feeding 
programmes targeting these vulnerable populations. 
The epidemiological situation in the region is dominated 
by cases of meningitis, measles, and the constant threat 
of a cholera epidemic. The hepatitis E epidemic that 
broke out in April 2017 is still not fully under control, with 
227 new suspected cases recorded between January 
and July 2018. However, sensitization and prevention 
programmes have contributed to the reduction of new 
infections. Despite all efforts made by health authorities 
and RRP partners, it is clear that health care needs 
remain high. The poor quality of drugs administered in 
some health centres, and difficulties in recruiting 
qualified health workers and mobilizing care-givers are 
among the major challenges. 
In 2019, RRP actors will maintain and further strengthen 
essential health care services through integrating the 
management of childhood diseases, deworming and 
prevention of communicable diseases for children up to 
59 months in age. Children up to 11 months will be 
vaccinated. Screening and care for children aged 6 to 
59 months, who are at risk of acute malnutrition, will be 
provided. Health sector partners plan to enhance 
reproductive health services, raise the number of births 
attended by trained personnel and conduct awareness 
raising sessions on prevention of STI/HIV/AIDS. Periodic 
evaluations will be done with the involvement of 
community leaders. 
OBJECTIVE 1: 
Health status improved 
14 local health workers trained 
14 health facilities rehabilitated, equipped, supplied and 
locally staffed 
OBJECTIVE 2: 
Population has optimal access to reproductive health and 
HIV/AIDS services 
2,500 livebirths attended by skilled personnel 
4,000 women newly admitted to family planning 
OBJECTIVE 3: 
Implementation of integrated management of acute 
malnutrition programmes ensured 
4,600 children screened, identified, and admitted to MAM 
and SAM treatments 
Resilience 
Planned Response - NIGER 

R R P > 2 0 1 9 / 2 0 2 0 71 
The health centre in Sayam Forage refugee camp was 
built four years ago with temporary materials. It now 
needs to be rehabilitated, better equipped and staffed 
with professional health personnel. The Ministry of 
Health has recognized the Integrated Health Center in 
Sayam Forage as an integral part of the Niger health 
system. 
WHO has built a solid two-block hospital with a total 
capacity of ten beds. All infants born in the Integrated 
Health Center are recorded in the birth notification 
register which is regularly shared with the National 
Eligibility Committee in the Ministry of Interior as a 
measure to prevent statelessness. 
UNHCR / Louise Donovan 
Planned Response - NIGER

72 R R P > 2 0 1 9 / 2 0 2 0 
Livelihoods & Environment 
Diffa is among the regions in Niger with the highest 
annual population growth rate (4.7 per cent). According 
to estimates, the population doubles every 15 years. 
With the arrival of Nigerian refugees, the region has 
already seen a population increase of over 25 per cent 
since 2013. The volatile security situation is exacerbated 
by administrative restrictions put in place under the state 
of emergency. In addition, the socio-economic fabric has 
been highly impacted by the conflict with Boko Haram. 
Fishing in Lake Chad has been all but abandoned, 
border trade between Niger and Nigeria is diminished 
and the cross-border migration of farmers has increased 
the pressure on already fragile resources. The region 
has experienced severe environmental degradation due 
to climate change and a significant scarcity of natural 
resources poses ecological, social and economic risks to 
the entire sub-region. 
In 2019, RRP actors will target all refugees in Sayam 
Forage refugee camp and out-of-camp settings, but will 
prioritize 28,000 young refugees between 15 and 
25 years of age as well as host community members. 
The sector will focus on activities that promote 
sustainable use of natural resources by providing gas 
and training on seedling production and agriculture. RRP 
partners will also strengthen livelihoods by providing 
resources for production and engage in capacity 
building, combined with income generating activities. 
Cash Based Interventions will be promoted and 
partnerships with microfinance institutions developed. 
Activities aimed at strengthening entrepreneurial 
initiatives such as the creation of associations of 
producers, will be supported and strengthened. RRP 
partners will also facilitate and support the diversification 
of income sources and advocate for refugee access to 
local markets. 
Interventions such as ‘Food for Work’ and money 
transfer will be strengthened in 2019, rewarding 
refugees who participate in programmes to protect the 
ecosystem such as dune stabilization and planting trees. 
In complementing food distribution to empower families, 
agro-silvo-pastoral activities - those relating to 
agriculture featuring crops, forestry and the pasturage of 
animals - will be supported with capacity building and 
resources such as seeds and tools. A vocational training 
programme for youth will also be supported. 
UNDP’s intervention aims to strengthen the 
humanitarian, development, and peace nexus in the 
Diffa context, building support for development and 
validation of communal stabilisation plans and local 
development plans for four communes through a 
community participatory process already implemented in 
2018. Within the RRP framework, UNDP plans to 
continue supporting the implementation of well-defined 
activities related to livelihoods and the development of 
the local economy. 
OBJECTIVE 1: 
Self reliance and livelihoods improved 
100 persons met household needs through production kits 
received for agriculture/livestock/fisheries commercial 
activities 
4,173 students received vocational and technical training 
OBJECTIVE 2: 
Natural resources and shared environment better 
protected 
4,000 tree seedlings planted to mitigate deforestation 
Resilience 
Planned Response - NIGER 

R R P > 2 0 1 9 / 2 0 2 0 73 
Shelter & NFIs 
The shelter and non-food item (NFI) sector targets 
refugees and vulnerable members of the host 
community with the aim of improving their living 
conditions. However, despite the efforts made by RRP 
partners, significant shelter and NFI needs remain, 
presenting both a protection risk and a barrier to 
solutions for refugees. A needs assessment conducted 
in the Diffa region in June 2017 found that 75 per cent of 
refugees were in need of shelter and 55 per cent 
required non-food items. The assessment also 
underlined the poor shelter conditions outside villages 
where refugees have settled spontaneously. Ongoing 
displacement resulting in new arrivals and the highly 
mobile nature of the population in the region continue to 
increase shelter and NFI needs. Shelter responses have 
failed to meet the majority of needs, with 76 per cent of 
refugees who have not received shelter assistance and 
57 per cent who have not received NFIs for more than 
six months. 
Authorities in the Diffa region continue to promote 
shelter/NFI responses which link emergency response 
to recovery and development, prioritizing the provision 
of transitional and durable shelters. RRP partners will 
continue to address the emergency shelter needs of 
new arrivals through the distribution of emergency 
shelter kits in Sayam Forage camp while also targeting 
the most vulnerable refugees residing outside formal 
settlements. NFI needs will be met through the prepositioning 
of 5,000 NFI kits in Sayam Forage for the 
annual renewal as well as contingency requirements. 
In-kind assistance to approximately 1,200 refugees living 
both within and outside the camp will be complemented 
by Cash-Based Interventions to support refugees in 
meeting their basic needs. 
In Sayam Forage the emphasis will be on transitional 
shelter solutions. All emergency shelters will have to be 
replaced with transitional shelters known as Refugee 
Housing Units. 
RRP partners with the support of the European Union 
and the Ministry of Urbanization, will pursue durable 
shelter solutions for the out-of-camp populations by 
processes to formalise landownership and the 
construction of permanent shelters. This initiative, which 
is aligned with local and national development plans, will 
provide refugees and host communities with essential 
skills in construction techniques, while supporting 
broader community development processes. Within the 
framework of this scheme, host communities will receive 
assistance for the construction of semi-permanent 
shelters for persons with specific needs, including 
female-headed households. 
Through an integrated approach, shelter actions will find 
synergies with planned WASH, livelihoods, health, 
environment and protection interventions. 
OBJECTIVE 1: 
Shelter and infrastructure established, improved and 
maintained 
3,880 emergency shelters provided 
2,610 transitional shelters provided 
2,000 long-term/permanent shelters provided 
700 persons trained and equipped for shelter construction 
OBJECTIVE 2: 
Population has sufficient basic domestic items 
12,083 households provided with basic domestic items 
2,400 dignitary kits provided 
Resilience 
Planned Response - NIGER

74 R R P > 2 0 1 9 / 2 0 2 0 
OBJECTIVE 1: 
Supply of potable water increased or maintained 
20 litres of potable water available per person per day 
26 boreholes rehabilitated or constructed 
OBJECTIVE 2: 
Sanitation and hygiene condition enhanced 
1,340 communal latrines constructed 
Resilience 
WASH 
WASH assistance is provided to all refugees in Sayam 
Forage and out-of-camp as well as host communities. In 
2018, more than 232 latrines and 169 semi-durable 
showers were maintained and waste management was 
improved. These achievements had a positive impact on 
refugee health. 
In 2019, RRP partners will continue to maintain existing 
communal infrastructure and will support the 
construction of household latrines following the 
Community-Led Total Sanitation (CLTS) approach, with 
participation of refugees in Sayam Forage camp and 
urban sites. Awareness campaigns on essential good 
practices regarding water and sanitation will be 
organized and waste management improved. To this 
end, WASH committees and garbage collectors 
recognized by the municipalities will be created. 
At mid-year 2018, access to potable water stood at 
18.9 litres per person per day in the refugee camp but 
just 14.7 litres in out-of-camp sites. 
The 2019 priority needs identified by the sector include 
the construction and rehabilitation of drinking water 
supply facilities and the provision of water for livestock, 
fish farming and agriculture. New drinking water 
installations are necessary due to the spontaneous 
creation of new neighbourhoods in the camp and in 
urbanized sites not covered by water sources. To date, 
the water network in Sayam Forage does not cover the 
whole camp. Particular attention will be placed on 
improved collection and storage of water. 
In 2019, RRP partners intend to provide drinking water 
for over 68,000 refugees in the camp and in urbanized 
sites of eight municipalities in the Diffa region. 
Emergency facilities (tanks connected to tap stands, 
water trucking) will be maintained while more 
sustainable structures are being established. It is 
planned that municipalities will gradually take over the 
management and implementation of these interventions. 
Regarding hygiene and sanitation, RRP partners will not 
only maintain existing communal and family sanitation 
infrastructures, but also construct new emergency 
latrines. New family latrines will also be built. Campaigns 
on basic hygiene practices will be organized in order to 
prevent and contain outbreaks of epidemics. A solid 
waste management system will be put in place with the 
support of collection kits and households will receive 
hygiene kits and soap on a regular basis. 
The WASH sector will work closely with actors across all 
sectors to ensure an adequate response is provided 
consistent with the WASH strategy. Partnerships will be 
further strengthened, not only with the Directorate of 
Water as a technical advisor, but also with state services 
SPEN/SEEN (Niger Water Heritage Company/Niger 
Water Exploitation Company) in the urbanization project. 
Meetings with partners working in the sector and 
beneficiaries will be organized to understand issues 
related to the implementation of the strategy and to 
identify possible solutions. 
Planned Response - NIGER 

R R P > 2 0 1 9 / 2 0 2 0 75 
Financial Requirements 
By Organization & Sector 
ORGANIZATION PROT EDU 
FOOD 
SEC 
HEALTH & 
NUTR 
LIVELIHOODS 
& 
ENVIRON 
SHELTER 
& NFIS 
WASH TOTAL 
ESTIMATE 
2020 
ACF 100,000 463,918 563,918 563,918 
ACTED 1,100,000 1,100,000 1,100,000 
CARE International 212,100 171,865 130,248 28,400 108,606 651,219 651,219 
Concern Worldwide 962,199 962,199 962,199 
COOPI 500,272 500,272 500,272 
DRC 126,000 126,000 126,000 
DIKO Niger 22,901 91,726 68,370 348,640 531,637 531,637 
FAO 500,000 500,000 500,000 
IMC 400,000 400,000 400,000 
IOM 2,292,500 2,292,500 2,292,500 
IRC 500,000 226,310 1,327,300 578,516 2,632,126 2,632,126 
Luxembourg Red Cross 620,988 620,988 620,988 
Oxfam 60,139 335,610 134,480 530,229 530,229 
Plan International 52,119 260,000 298,000 374,680 984,799 984,799 
Save the Children 
International 
274,276 613,552 887,828 887,828 
SDO Niger 400,000 400,000 400,000 
Search for Common Ground 3,300,000 3,300,000 3,300,000 
SOS Children's Villages 130,000 27,417 157,417 157,417 
UNDP 1,650,000 1,650,000 1,650,000 
UNHCR 5,120,018 538,827 1,501,858 3,875,883 8,003,092 1,766,769 20,806,448 22,006,448 
UNICEF 240,000 1,485,680 116,000 3,842,000 5,683,680 5,683,680 
UNFPA 650,000 590,060 1,240,060 1,240,060 
Welthungerhilfe 60,900 60,900 60,900 
WFP 10,318,146 10,318,146 10,318,146 
WHO 830,000 830,000 830,000 
World Vision International 350,100 430,360 496,236 1,276,696 1,276,696 
TOTAL 11,221,786 3,028,059 11,830,385 3,735,918 9,026,052 12,774,336 7,390,525 59,007,061 60,207,062 
Financial Requirements - NIGER

UNHCR / Louise Donovan

ANNEX

78 R R P > 2 0 1 9 / 2 0 2 0 
Regional Protection Dialogue 
on the Lake Chad Basin 
Abuja Action Statement 
We, the Governments of Nigeria, Cameroon, Chad and Niger, with the support of technical and financial partners 
gathered in Abuja, Nigeria, on 6 to 8 June 2016 within the framework of the Regional Protection Dialogue on the 
Lake Chad Basin, hosted by the Federal Government of Nigeria, with the technical facilitation of the United Nations 
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) to discuss the most urgent protection risks in the Lake Chad Basin 
resulting from the conflict-induced crisis; 
Agree on comprehensive actions to enhance protection and respond to the most urgent needs of refugees, 
internally displaced persons (IDPs) and other affected populations; 
Note that the Boko Haram insurgency and its spill over into neighbouring Cameroon, Chad and Niger have caused 
the displacement of over 2.7 million people in the region, of whom 2.1 million are internally displaced in Nigeria, while 
some 155,000 Nigerian refugees have sought asylum in Cameroon, Chad and Niger. The refugee-hosting countries 
also have sizeable IDP populations (Cameroon: 200,000; Chad: 110,000; and Niger: 127,208); 
Reaffirm the validity of the principles and standards of the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees and its 
1967 Protocol as well as the 1969 Convention Governing the Specific Aspects of Refugee Problems in Africa (“OAU 
Refugee Convention”), in particular the principle of non-refoulement; the 2009 African Union Convention for the 
Protection and Assistance of Internally Displaced Persons in Africa (“Kampala Convention”), especially the prohibition 
of forced displacement and the 1954 Convention relating to the Status of Stateless Persons and the 1961 Convention 
on the Reduction of Statelessness (“1954 and 1961 Conventions on Statelessness”); 
Recognize that while military operations have led to significant advances in the fight against Boko Haram and have 
brought back a number of areas in north-eastern Nigeria under Government control, conditions in much of the 
north-east are not yet conducive for the return of Nigerian refugees and IDPs, due to continuing insecurity and the 
absence of basic services which pose acute humanitarian and protection risks for the affected populations, 
particularly in Borno state; 
Further note that alongside persistent threats from Boko Haram, the presence of mines and unexploded improvised 
devices, climatic change as well as the drying up of Lake Chad, which exacerbate pre-existing vulnerabilities, further 
poses protection risks for the affected populations in the border regions of Cameroon, Chad and Niger, where Boko 
Haram attacks on civilians also continue or have intensified in some instances; 
.ANNEX 

R R P > 2 0 1 9 / 2 0 2 0 79 
Recognize the legitimate national security concerns of the States and the need to ensure an appropriate balance 
between security and human rights, the obligation to protect IDPs and refugees, and the right to seek and enjoy 
asylum; 
Stress the importance of maintaining the civilian and humanitarian character of refugee and IDP-hosting areas as an 
important protection standard with broad implications on other protection issues such as physical security, the 
prevention of sexual and gender-based violence (SGBV), prevention of child recruitment as well as access to 
assistance; 
Note that the crisis has seriously impacted the most vulnerable civilians, including refugees, IDPs and host 
communities, particularly women and children at risk, older persons and persons with disabilities or serious medical 
conditions; that violence against women and children, including SGBV, is widespread, that many persons have 
suffered the trauma of violent experiences and that there is a significant rise in the number of child and femaleheaded 
households; 
Welcome the progress made in the region in identifying, preventing and reducing statelessness, including the 
signing of the 2015 Abidjan Declaration of Ministers of ECOWAS Member States on Eradication of Statelessness by 
Nigeria and Niger, while recognizing that there are still important challenges, in particular the high number of persons 
in the region who lack documentation and have difficulties proving their nationality and therefore remain at risk of 
statelessness. 
In view of the foregoing: 
In the area of forced displacement and freedom of movement in conflict, we agree to: 
1. Take concrete steps, including continuous monitoring, to ensure that security measures such as restrictions on 
freedom of movement in the context of state of emergency and evacuations comply with international standards, 
and are temporary and exceptional in nature. 
2. Strengthen collaboration between government actors, humanitarian organisations, and other relevant 
stakeholders to ensure the voluntariness of return and the freedom of movement of displaced persons as well as 
their physical security. 
3. Develop and implement practical measures to ensure an appropriate balance between security and respect for 
the right to seek and enjoy asylum, including respect for the principle of non-refoulement, protection of IDPs and 
related human rights. 
4. Promote knowledge and training among all stakeholders, including government actors, such as security forces, 
international organizations and civil society, of the limits and safeguards of refugee and IDP protection, as 
outlined in international and regional legal instruments such as the 1951 Refugee Convention, the 1969 OAU 
Convention, and the Kampala Convention. 
5. Enhance regional coordination and exchange of best practices through greater engagement by States and 
humanitarian actors with regional institutions such as the Multinational Joint Task Force (MNJTF), the Lake Chad 
Basin Commission, the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), and Economic Community of 
Central African States (ECCAS). 
.ANNEX

80 R R P > 2 0 1 9 / 2 0 2 0 
6. Commit to prioritize the ratification, domestication and implementation of international conventions, including the 
Kampala Convention. 
In the area of civil-military coordination and the civilian character of refugee and IDP hosting areas, we agree to: 
7. Develop a capacity building program (training) for security forces and the MNJTF on key international 
humanitarian standards, international protection and human rights, civilian and humanitarian character of refugee 
and IDP sites, and sensitize humanitarian and military actors on civil-military coordination to protect and promote 
humanitarian principles. 
8. Enhance civil-military coordination to ensure an appropriate distinction between the roles of humanitarian actors 
and security forces as well as to enable humanitarian actors to reach people in need of assistance in difficult to 
reach areas. 
9. Enhance screening and other security measures to maintain the civilian and humanitarian character of refugee 
and IDP sites, ensuring that these are conducted in a dignified manner and are gender and age-sensitive. 
Encourage at the same time greater information-sharing, while ensuring the protection of informants, IDPs, 
refugees, humanitarian actors, etc. 
10. Strengthen access to justice, support the development of legal frameworks, provide legal assistance and 
encourage communities to use traditional conflict resolution mechanisms, where applicable and provided these 
are not in violation of national law. 
In the area of persons with specific protection risks, we agree to: 
11. Strengthen the identification of persons with specific needs, such as women and children at risk, through 
multi-sectoral needs assessments, improved registration and profiling, while ensuring data protection. 
12. Improve multi-sectoral referral and response mechanisms in order to ensure better access to basic services. 
13. Pay particular attention to the needs of children at risk, including unaccompanied and separated children and 
children at risk of exposure to SGBV, child recruitment, forced marriage, exploitation and abuse; and ensure 
referal to appropriate services, such as psychosocial support and post-traumatic services. 
14. Ensure an increased involvement of local communities and community-based organizations in the provision of 
support and services to most vulnerable groups, including older persons, the chronically ill, persons with 
disabilities and youth, through improved protection coordination and a greater involvement of the affected 
populations. 
15. Commit to promulgate national legislation aimed at protecting and increasing the involvement and engagement 
of affected populations through advocacy and awareness campaigns. 
In the area of comprehensive solutions approach, we agree to: 
16. Support the processes aimed at achieving all durable solutions [local integration, voluntary return, and relocation 
for IDPs and resettlement to a third country for refugees], including by enhancing access to basic services, 
livelihood opportunities, and financial services; promoting peaceful co-existence among refugee, IDP and host 
communities; and encouraging environmentally friendly measures. 
.ANNEX 

R R P > 2 0 1 9 / 2 0 2 0 81 
17. Ensure that refugee and IDP returns are voluntary, in safety and dignity, and based on well-informed decisions, 
once conditions are conducive, and that facilitated returns of refugees are within the framework of a tripartite 
agreement, and respect the principle of non-refoulement. 
18. Establish the nexus between humanitarian response and development to support durable solutions such as local 
integration and reintegration, through joint and coordinated planning between humanitarian and development 
actors to ensure the inclusion of refugees, IDPs and returnees in development planning. 
19. Guarantee the centrality of protection by ensuring the participation of affected persons in the planning and 
implementation of solutions, taking into account age, gender and diversity, and paying particular attention to 
persons with specific needs. 
In the area of right to nationality and documentation, we agree to: 
20. Conduct awareness campaigns on the importance of civil registration and relevant procedures, through the use 
of local media and the involvement of traditional and religious leaders. 
21. Simplify birth registration and civil documentation procedures; organize and equip mobile registration centers 
and create more registration centers especially in remote areas; integrate birth registration in other sectors, such 
as education and health; and reduce the cost of birth registration and documentation. 
22. Ensure national laws and policies comply with existing relevant international and regional standards, for example 
as defined in the 1954 and 1961 Conventions on Statelessness, the African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of 
the Child, and to support the adoption of a Protocol to the African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights on the 
right to nationality and eradication of statelessness. 
23. Create a forum for consultation and sharing of best practices between States on issues of civil documentation 
and the risk of statelessness in the Lake Chad Basin. 
Follow-up mechanism 
To ensure follow-up of the above outlined actions, we further agree to: 
24. Establish a plan of action at national level within 6 months of the adoption of the Action Statement, and review 
progress in implementation at national level at regular periods of no more than 6 months, and at regional level 
after 12 months. 
Done in Abuja, Nigeria, on 8 June 2016 
.ANNEX

82 R R P > 2 0 1 9 / 2 0 2 0 
List of acronyms 
ABIOGET Actions pour la Biodiversité et Gestion des Terroirs 
ACF Action Contre la Faim 
ACTED Agency for Technical Cooperation and Development 
AGDM Age, Gender and Diversity Mainstreaming 
ART Anti-Retroviral Therapy 
BID Best Interest Determination 
BSFP Blanket Supplementary Feeding Programme 
CAPROD Centre d'Appui à l'Auto Promotion pour le 
Développement Durable 
CBI Cash-Based Intervention 
CCCM Camp Coordination and Camp Management 
CFS Child Friendly Space 
CNARR Commission Nationale pour l’Accueil et la Réinsertion 
des Réfugiés et des Rapatriés 
COOPI Cooperazione Internazionale 
COPRESSA Centre Optionnel pour la Promotion et la 
Régénération Economique et Sociale Secteur Afrique 
CRENI Centre de récupération nutritionnelle intensive 
CRRF Comprehensive Refugee Response Framework 
CSI Centre de santé intégré 
DIKO ONG DIKO: Association pour le Secours aux 
Populations Vulnérables 
DRC Danish Refugee Council 
EFSA Emergency Food Security Assessment 
FAO Food and Agriculture Organization 
FBM Food Basket Monitoring 
GAM Global Acute Malnutrition 
HCT Humanitarian Country Team 
HIAS Hebrew Immigrant Aid Society 
IDP Internally Displaced Person 
IEDA International Emergency and Development Aid 
IGA Income Generating Activity 
IMC International Medical Corps 
INTERSOS INTERSOS Organizzazione Umanitaria 
IOM International Organization for Migration 
IRC International Rescue Committee 
IUCN International Union for Conservation of Nature 
IYCF Infant and Young Child Feeding 
Luxembourg 
RC 
Luxembourg Red Cross 
LWF Lutheran World Federation 
MAM Moderate Acute Malnutrition 
MHPSS Mental Health and Psychosocial Support 
MNJTF Multi-National Joint Task Force 
MUAC Mid-upper arm circumference 
NFI Non-food item 
NRC Norwegian Refugee Council 
OCHA Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs 
PDM Post Distribution Monitoring 
PoC Person of concern 
PSN Persons with specific needs 
RCM Refugee Coordination Model 
RRC Regional Refugee Coordinator 
SAM Severe acute malnutrition 
SDO Secours Des Oubliés 
SENS Standardised Expanded Nutrition Survey 
SFCG Search for Common Ground 
SGBV Sexual and gender-based violence 
SMART Standardized Monitoring and Assessment of Relief 
and Transitions 
UAM Unaccompanied Minor 
UASC Unaccompanied and Separated Child 
UNDAF United Nations Development Assistance Framework 
UNDP United Nations Development Programme 
UNFPA United Nations Population Fund 
UNHCR United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees 
UNICEF United Nations Children's Fund 
WASH Water, Sanitation and Hygiene 
WESDE Water Energy and Sanitation for Development 
WFP World Food Programme 
WHO World Health Organization 
.ANNEX 

ORGANIZZAZIONE UMANITARIA 
LWF 
Working Together 
Thank you to donors who contributed to the 2018 Nigeria Refugee Response Plan, including: 
Canada | CERF | European Union | France | Germany | Japan | Norway | Private Donors | Spain | Sweden | 
Switzerland | United Arab Emirates | United States Of America 
AIDER

